Stanley had no trouble falling asleep, but morning came much too quickly. Every
muscle and joint in his body ached as he tried to get out of bed. He didn't think it was
possible but his body hurt more than it had the day before. It wasn't just his arms and
back, but his legs, ankles, and waist also hurt. The only thing that got him out of bed
was knowing that every second he wasted meant he was one second closer to the rising
of the sun. He hated the sun.
He could hardly lift his spoon during breakfast, and then he was out on the lake, his
spoon replaced by a shovel. He found a crack in the ground, and began his second hole.
He stepped on the shovel blade, and pushed on the very back of the shaft with the
base of his thumb. This hurt less than trying to hold the shaft with his blistered fingers.
As he dug, he was careful to dump the dirt far away from the hole. He needed to
save the area around the hole for when his hole was much deeper.
He didn't know if he'd ever get that far. X-Ray was right. The second hole was the
hardest. It would take a miracle.
As long as the sun wasn't out yet, he removed his cap and used it to help protect his
hands. Once the sun rose, he would have to put it back on his head. His neck and
forehead had been badly burned the day before.
He took it one shovelful at a time, and tried not to think of the awesome task that lay
ahead of him. After an hour or so, his sore muscles seemed to loosen up a little bit.
He grunted as he tried to stick his shovel into the dirt. His cap slipped out from
under his fingers, and the shovel fell free.
He let it lie there.
He took a drink from his canteen. He guessed that the water truck should be coming
soon, but he didn't finish all the water, just in case he was wrong. He'd learned to wait
until he saw the truck, before drinking the last drop.
The sun wasn't yet up, but its rays arced over the horizon and brought light to the
sky.

23
He reached down to pick up his cap, and there next to it he saw a wide flat rock. As
he put his cap on his head, he continued to look down at the rock.
He picked it up. He thought he could see the shape of a fish, fossilized in it.
He rubbed off some dirt, and the outline of the fish became clearer. The sun peeked
over the horizon, and he could actually see tiny lines where every one of the fish's bones
had been.
He looked at the barren land all around him. True, everyone referred to this area as
"the lake," but it was still hard to believe that this dry wasteland was once full of water.
Then he remembered what Mr. Sir and Mr. Pendanski had both said. If he dug up
anything interesting, he should report it to one of them. If the Warden liked it, he would
get the rest of the day off.
He looked back down at his fish. He'd found his miracle.
He continued to dig, though very slowly, as he waited for the water truck. He didn't
want to bring attention to his find, afraid that one of the other boys might try to take it
from him. He tossed the rock, face down, beside his dirt pile, as if it had no special
value. A short while later he saw the cloud of dirt heading across the lake.
The truck stopped and the boys lined up. They always lined up in the same order,
Stanley realized, no matter who got there first. X-Ray was always at the front of the line.
Then came Armpit, Squid, Zigzag, Magnet, and Zero.
Stanley got in line behind Zero. He was glad to be at the back, so no one would
notice the fossil. His pants had very large pockets, but the rock still made a bulge.
Mr. Pendanski filled each boy's canteen, until Stanley was the only one left.
"I found something," Stanley said, taking it out of his pocket.
Mr. Pendanski reached for Stanley's canteen, but Stanley handed him the rock
instead.
"What's this?"
"It's a fossil," said Stanley. "See the fish?"
Mr. Pendanski looked at it again.
"See, you can even see all of its little bones," said Stanley.
"Interesting," said Mr. Pendanski. "Let me have your canteen."
Stanley handed it to him. Mr. Pendanski filled it, then returned it.
"So do I get the rest of the day off?"
"What for?"
"You know, you said if I found something interesting, the Warden would give me
the day off."
Mr. Pendanski laughed as he gave the fossil back to Stanley. "Sorry, Stanley. The
Warden isn't interested in fossils."
"Let me see that," said Magnet, taking the rock from Stanley.
Stanley continued to stare at Mr. Pendanski.
"Hey, Zig, dig this rock."
"Cool," said Zigzag.
Stanley saw his fossil being passed around.

24
"I don't see nothing," said X-Ray. He took off his glasses, wiped them on his dirty
clothes, and put them back on.
"See, look at the little fishy," said Armpit.

11
Stanley returned to his hole. It wasn't fair. Mr. Pendanski had even said his fossil
was interesting. He slammed his shovel into the ground and pried up another piece of
earth.
After a while, he noticed X-Ray had come by and was watching him dig.
"Hey, Caveman, let me talk to you a second," X-Ray said.
Stanley put down his shovel and stepped up out of his hole.
"Say, listen," said X-Ray. "If you find something else, give it to me, okay?"
Stanley wasn't sure what to say. X-Ray was clearly the leader of the group, and
Stanley didn't want to get on his bad side.
"You're new here, right?" said X-Ray. "I've been here for almost a year. I've never
found anything. You know, my eyesight's not so good. No one knows this, but you
know why my name's X-Ray?"
Stanley shrugged one shoulder.
"It's pig latin for Rex. That's all. I'm too blind to find anything."
Stanley tried to remember how pig latin worked.
"I mean," X-Ray went on, "why should you get a day off when you've only been
here a couple of days? If anybody gets a day off, it should be me. That's only fair,
right?"
"I guess," Stanley agreed.
X-Ray smiled. "You're a good guy, Caveman."
Stanley picked up his shovel.
The more he thought about it, the more he was glad that he agreed to let X-Ray have
anything he might find. If he was going to survive at Camp Green Lake, it was far more
important that X-Ray think he was a good guy than it was for him to get one day off.
Besides, he didn't expect to find anything anyway. There probably wasn't anything "of
interest" out there, and even if there was, he'd never been what you could call lucky.
He slammed his blade into the ground, then dumped out another shovelful of dirt. It
was a little surprising, he thought, that X-Ray was the leader of the group, since he
obviously wasn't the biggest or the toughest. In fact, except for Zero, X-Ray was the
smallest. Armpit was the biggest. Zigzag may have been taller than Armpit, but that
was only because of his neck. Yet Armpit, and all the others, seemed to be willing to do
whatever X-Ray asked of them.
As Stanley dug up another shovelful of dirt, it occurred to him that Armpit wasn't
the biggest. He, the Caveman, was bigger.
He was glad they called him Caveman. It meant they accepted him as a member of
the group. He would have been glad even if they'd called him Barf Bag.

25
It was really quite remarkable to him. At school, bullies like Derrick Dunne used to
pick on him. Yet Derrick Dunne would be scared senseless by any of the boys here.
As he dug his hole, Stanley thought about what it would be like if Derrick Dunne
had to fight Armpit or Squid. Derrick wouldn't stand a chance.
He imagined what it would be like if he became good friends with all of them, and
then for some reason they all went with him to his school, and then Derrick Dunne tried
to steal his notebook . . .
"Just what do you think you're doing?" asks Squid, as he slams his hands into
Derrick Dunne's smug face.
"Caveman's our friend," says Armpit, grabbing him by the shin collar.
Stanley played the scene over and over again in his mind, each time watching
another boy from Group D beat up Derrick Dunne. It helped him dig his hole and ease
his own suffering. Whatever pain he felt was being felt ten times worse by Derrick.

12
Again, Stanley was the last one to finish digging. It was late afternoon when he
dragged himself back to the compound. This time he would have accepted a ride on the
truck if it was offered.
When he got to the tent, he found Mr. Pendanski and the other boys sitting in a
circle on the ground.
"Welcome, Stanley," said Mr. Pendanski.
"Hey, Caveman. You get your hole dug?" asked Magnet.
He managed to nod.
"You spit in it?" asked Squid.
He nodded again. "You're right," he said to X-Ray. "The second hole's the hardest."
X-Ray shook his head. "The third hole's the hardest," he said.
"Come join our circle," said Mr. Pendanski.
Stanley plopped down between Squid and Magnet. He needed to rest up before
taking a shower.
"We've been discussing what we want to do with our lives," said Mr. Pendanski.
"We're not going to be at Camp Green Lake forever. We need to prepare for the day we
leave here and join the rest of society."
"Hey, that's great, Mom!" said Magnet. "They're going to finally let you out of
here?"
The other boys laughed.
"Okay, Jose," said Mr. Pendanski. "What do you want to do with your life?"
"I don't know," said Magnet.
"You need to think about that," said Mr. Pendanski. "It's important to have goals.
Otherwise you're going to end up right back in jail. What do you like to do?"
"I don't know," said Magnet.
"You must like something," said Mr. Pendanski.
"I like animals," said Magnet.

26
"Good," said Mr. Pendanski. "Does anyone know of any jobs that involve
animals?"
"Veterinarian," said Armpit.
"That's right," said Mr. Pendanski.
"He could work in a zoo," said Zigzag.
"He belongs in the zoo," said Squid, then he and X-Ray laughed.
"How about you, Stanley? Any ideas for Jose?"
Stanley sighed. "Animal trainer," he said. "Like for the circus, or movies, or
something like that."
"Any of those jobs sound good to you, Jose?" asked Mr. Pendanski.
"Yeah, I like what Caveman said. About training animals for movies. I think it
would be fun to train monkeys."
X-Ray laughed.
"Don't laugh, Rex," said Mr. Pendanski. "We don't laugh at people's dreams.
Someone is going to have to train monkeys for the movies."
"Who are you kidding, Mom?" asked X-Ray. "Magnet's never going to be a
monkey trainer."
"You don't know that," said Mr. Pendanski. "I'm not saying it's going to be easy.
Nothing in life is easy. But that's no reason to give up. You'll be surprised what you can
accomplish if you set your mind to it. After all, you only have one life, so you should try
to make the most of it.''
Stanley tried to figure out what he'd say if Mr. Pendanski asked him what he wanted
to do with his life. He used to think he wanted to work for the F.B.I., but this didn't seem
the appropriate place to mention that.
"So far you've all done a pretty good job at messing up your lives," said Mr.
Pendanski. "I know you think you're cool." He looked at Stanley. "So you're Caveman,
now, huh? You like digging holes, Caveman?"
Stanley didn't know what to say.
"Well, let me tell you something, Caveman. You are here on account of one person.
If it wasn't for that person, you wouldn't be here digging holes in the hot sun. You know
who that person is?"
"My no-good-dirty-rotten-pig-stealing-great-great-grand-father."
The other boys howled with laughter.
Even Zero smiled.
It was the first time Stanley had ever seen Zero smile. He usually had such an angry
expression on his face. Now he had such a huge smile it almost seemed too big for his
face, like the smile on a jack-o'-lantern.
"No," said Mr. Pendanski. "That person is you, Stanley. You're the reason you are
here. You're responsible for yourself. You messed up your life, and it's up to you to fix
it. No one else is going to do it for you? for any of you."
Mr. Pendanski looked from one boy to another. "You're all special in your own
way," he said. "You've all got something to offer. You have to think about what you
want to do, then do it. Even you, Zero. You're not completely worthless."
The smile was now gone from Zero's face.

27

"What do you want to do with your life?" Mr. Pendanski asked him.
Zero's mouth was shut tight. As he glared at Mr. Pendanski, his dark eyes seemed to
expand.
"What about it, Zero?" asked Mr. Pendanski. "What do you like to do?"
"I like to dig holes."

13
All too soon Stanley was back out on the lake, sticking his shovel into the dirt.
X-Ray was right: the third hole was the hardest. So was the fourth hole. And the fifth
hole. And the sixth, and the . . .
He dug his shovel into the dirt.
After a while he'd lost track of the day of the week, and how many holes he'd dug. It
all seemed like one big hole, and it would take a year and a half to dig it. He guessed
he'd lost at least five pounds. He figured that in a year and a half he'd be either in great
physical condition, or else dead.
He dug his shovel into the dirt.
It couldn't always be this hot, he thought. Surely it got cooler in December. Maybe
then they froze.
He dug his shovel into the dirt.
His skin had gotten tougher. It didn't hurt so much to hold the shovel.
As he drank from his canteen he looked up at the sky. A cloud had appeared earlier
in the day. It was the first cloud he could remember seeing since coming to Camp Green
Lake.
He and the other boys had been watching it all day, hoping it would move in front of
the sun. Occasionally it got close, but it was just teasing them.
His hole was waist deep. He dug his shovel into the dirt. As he dumped it out, he
thought he saw something glisten as it fell onto the dirt pile. Whatever it was, it was
quickly buried.
Stanley stared at the pile a moment, unsure if he'd even seen it. Even if it was
something, what good would it do him? He'd promised to give anything he found to
X-Ray. It didn't seem worth the effort to climb out of his hole to check it out.
He glanced up at the cloud, which was close enough to the sun that he had to squint
to look at it.
He dug his shovel back into the earth, scooped out some dirt, and lifted it over his
dirt pile. But instead of dumping it there, he tossed it off to the side. His curiosity had
gotten the better of him.
He climbed up out of his hole and sifted his fingers through the pile. He felt
something hard and metallic.
He pulled it out. It was a gold tube, about as long and as wide as the second finger
on his right hand. The tube was open at one end and closed at the other.
He used a few drops of his precious water to clean it.

28
There seemed to be some kind of design on the flat, closed end. He poured a few
more drops of water on it and rubbed it on the inside of his pants pocket.
He looked again at the design engraved into the flat bottom of the tube. He could
see an outline of a heart, with the letters K B etched inside it.
He tried to figure out some way that he wouldn't have to give it to X-Ray. He could
just keep it, but that wouldn't do him any good. He wanted a day off.
He looked at the large piles of dirt near where X-Ray was digging. X-Ray was
probably almost finished for the day. Getting the rest of the day off would hardly do
him much good. X-Ray would first have to show the tube to Mr. Sir or Mr. Pendanski,
who would then have to show it to the Warden. By then X-Ray might be done anyway.
Stanley wondered about trying to secretly take the tube directly to the Warden. He
could explain the situation to the Warden, and the Warden might make up an excuse for
giving him the day off, so X-Ray wouldn't suspect.
He looked across the lake toward the cabin under the two oak trees. The place
scared him. He'd been at Camp Green Lake almost two weeks, and he still hadn't seen
the Warden. That was just as well. If he could go his entire year and a half without
seeing the Warden, that would be fine with him.
Besides, he didn't know if the Warden would find the tube "interesting." He looked
at it again. It looked familiar. He thought he'd seen something like it, somewhere before,
but couldn't quite place it.
"What you got there, Caveman?" asked Zigzag.
Stanley's large hand closed around the tube. "Nothin', just, uh . . ." It was useless. "I
think I might have found something."
"Another fossil?"
"No, I'm not sure what it is."
"Let me see," said Zigzag.
Instead of showing it to Zigzag, Stanley brought it to X-Ray. Zigzag followed.
X-Ray looked at the tube, then rubbed his dirty glasses on his dirty shirt and looked
at the tube again. One by one, the other boys dropped their shovels and came to look.
"It looks like an old shotgun shell," said Squid.
"Yeah, that's probably what it is," said Stanley. He decided not to mention the
engraved design. Maybe nobody would notice it. He doubted X-Ray could see it.
"No, it's too long and thin to be a shotgun shell," said Magnet.
"It's prob'ly just a piece of junk," said Stanley.
"Well, I'll show it to Mom," said X-Ray. "See what he thinks. Who knows? Maybe
I'll get the day off."
"Your hole's almost finished," said Stanley.
"Yeah, so?"
Stanley raised and lowered his shoulder. "So, why don't you wait until tomorrow to
show it to Mom?" he suggested. "You can pretend you found it first thing in the
morning. Then you can get the whole day off, instead of just an hour or so this
afternoon."
X-Ray smiled. "Good thinking, Caveman." He dropped the tube into his large
pocket on the right leg of his dirty orange pants.

29

Stanley returned to his hole.
When the water truck came, Stanley started to take his place at the end of the line,
but X-Ray told him to get behind Magnet, in front of Zero.
Stanley moved up one place in line.

14
That night, as Stanley lay on his scratchy and smelly cot, he tried to figure out what
he could have done differently, but there was nothing he could do. For once in his
unlucky life, he was in the right place at the right time, and it still didn't help him.
"You got it?" he asked X-Ray the next morning at breakfast.
X-Ray looked at him with half-opened eyes behind his dirty glasses. "I don't know
what you're talking about," he grumbled.
"You know . . ." said Stanley.
"No, I don't know!" X-Ray snapped. "So just leave me alone, okay? I don't want to
talk to you."
Stanley didn't say another word.
Mr. Sir marched the boys out to the lake, chewing sunflower seeds along the way
and spitting out the shells. He scraped the ground with his boot heel, to mark where
each boy was supposed to dig.
Stanley stamped down on the back of the blade of the shovel, piercing the hard, dry
earth. He couldn't figure out why X-Ray snapped at him. If he wasn't going to produce
the tube, why did he make Stanley give it to him? Was he just going to keep it? The tube
was gold in color, but Stanley didn't think it was real gold.
The water truck came a little after sunrise. Stanley finished his last drop of water
and stepped up out of his hole. At this time of day, Stanley sometimes could see some
distant hills or mountains on the other side of the lake. They were only visible for a
short while and would soon disappear behind the haze of heat and dirt.
The truck stopped, and the dust cloud drifted past it. X-Ray took his place at the
front of the line. Mr. Pendanski filled his canteen. "Thanks, Mom," X-Ray said. He
didn't mention the tube.
Mr. Pendanski filled all the canteens, then climbed back into the cab of the pickup.
He still had to bring water to Group E. Stanley could see them digging about two
hundred yards away.
"Mr. Pendanski!" X-Ray shouted from his hole. "Wait! Mr. Pendanski! I think I
might have found something!"
The boys all followed Mr. Pendanski as he walked over to X-Ray's hole. Stanley
could see the gold tube sticking out of some dirt on the end of X-Ray's shovel.
Mr. Pendanski examined it and took a long look at its flat bottom. "I think the
Warden is going to like this."
"Does X-Ray get the day off?" asked Squid.
"Just keep digging until someone says otherwise," Mr. Pendanski said. Then he
smiled. "But if I were you, Rex, I wouldn't dig too hard."

30
Stanley watched the cloud of dust move across the lake to the cabin beneath the
trees.
The boys in Group E were just going to have to wait.
It didn't take long for the pickup to return. Mr. Pendanski stepped out of the cab. A
tall woman with red hair stepped out of the passenger side. She looked even taller than
she was, since Stanley was down in his hole. She wore a black cowboy hat and black
cowboy boots which were studded with turquoise stones. The sleeves on her shirt were
rolled up, and her arms were covered with freckles, as was her face. She walked right
up to X-Ray.
"This where you found it?"
"Yes, ma'am."
"Your good work will be rewarded." She turned to Mr. Pendanski. "Drive X-Ray
back to camp. Let him take a double shower, and give him some clean clothes. But first
I want you to fill everyone's canteen."
"I just filled them a little while ago," said Mr. Pendanski.
The Warden stared hard at him. "Excuse me," she said. Her voice was soft.
"I had just filled them when Rex? "
"Excuse me," the Warden said again. "Did I ask you when you last filled them?"
"No, but it's just? "
"Excuse me."
Mr. Pendanski stopped talking. The Warden wiggled her finger for him to come to
her. "It's hot and it's only going to get hotter," she said. "Now, these fine boys have been
working hard. Don't you think it might be possible that they might have taken a drink
since you last filled their canteens?"
Mr. Pendanski said nothing.
The Warden turned to Stanley. "Caveman, will you come here, please?"
Stanley was surprised she knew his name. He had never seen her. Until she stepped
out of the truck, he didn't even know the Warden was a woman.
He nervously went toward her.
"Mr. Pendanski and I have been having a discussion. Have you taken a drink since
Mr. Pendanski last filled your canteen?"
Stanley didn't want to cause any trouble for Mr. Pendanski. "I still got plenty left,"
he said.
"Excuse me."
He stopped. "Yeah, I drank some."
"Thank you. May I see your canteen please."
Stanley handed it to her. Her fingernails were painted dark red.
She gently shook the canteen, letting the water swish inside the plastic container.
"Do you hear the empty spaces?" she asked.
"Yes," said Mr. Pendanski.
"Then fill it," she said. "And the next time I tell you to do something, I expect you to
do it without questioning my authority. If it's too much trouble for you to fill a canteen,
I'll give you a shovel. You can dig the hole, and the Caveman can fill your canteen."

31
She turned back to Stanley. "I don't think that would be too much trouble for you,
would it?"
"No," said Stanley.
"So what will it be?" she asked Mr. Pendanski. "Do you want to fill the canteens or
do you want to dig?"
"I'll fill the canteens," said Mr. Pendanski.
"Thank you."

15
Mr. Pendanski filled the canteens.
The Warden got a pitchfork out of the back of the pickup. She poked it through
X-Ray's dirt pile, to see if anything else might have been buried in there as well.
"After you drop off X-Ray, I want you to bring back three wheelbarrows," she said.
X-Ray got in the pickup. As the truck pulled away, he leaned out the wide window
and waved.
"Zero," said the Warden. "I want you to take over X-Ray's hole." She seemed to
know that Zero was the fastest digger.
"Armpit and Squid, you will keep digging where you have been," she said. "But
you're each going to have a helper. Zigzag, you help Armpit. Magnet will help Squid.
And Caveman, you'll work with Zero. We're going to dig the dirt twice. Zero will dig it
out of the hole, and Caveman will carefully shovel it into a wheelbarrow. Zigzag will do
the same for Armpit, and the same with Magnet and Squid. We don't want to miss
anything. If either of you find something, you'll both get the rest of the day off, and a
double shower.
"When the wheelbarrows are full, you are to dump them away from this area. We
don't want any dirt piles to get in the way."
The Warden remained at the site for the remainder of the day, along with Mr.
Pendanski and Mr. Sir, who showed up after a while. Occasionally Mr. Sir would leave
to take water to the other groups of campers, but otherwise he and the water truck
stayed parked there. The Warden saw to it that nobody in Group D was ever thirsty.
Stanley did as he was told. He carefully looked through all the dirt dug up by Zero,
as he shoveled it into a wheelbarrow, though he knew he wouldn't find anything.
It was easier than digging his own hole. When the wheelbarrow was full, he took it
a good distance away before dumping it.
The Warden couldn't keep still. She kept walking around, looking over the boys'
shoulders, and sticking her pitchfork through the dirt piles. "You're doing fine, just
fine," she told Stanley.
After a while, she told the boys to switch places, so that Stanley, Zigzag, and
Magnet dug in the holes, and Zero, Armpit, and Squid shoveled the excavated dirt into
the wheelbarrows.

32

After lunch, Zero took over the digging again, and Stanley returned to the
wheelbarrow. "There's no hurry," the Warden said several times. "The main thing is not
to miss anything."
The boys dug until each hole was well over six feet deep and wide. Still, it was
easier for two boys to dig a six-foot hole than it was for one boy to dig a five-foot hole.
"All right, that's enough for today," the Warden said. "I've waited this long, I can
wait another day."
Mr. Sir drove her back to her cabin.
"I wonder how she knew all our names," Stanley said as he walked back to the
compound.
"She watches us all the time," said Zigzag. "She's got hidden microphones and
cameras all over the place. In the tents, the Wreck Room, the shower."
"The shower?" asked Stanley. He wondered if Zigzag was just being paranoid.
"The cameras are tiny," said Armpit. "No bigger than the toenail on your little toe."
Stanley had his doubts about that. He didn't think they could make cameras that
small. Microphones, maybe.
He realized that was why X-Ray didn't want to talk to him about the gold tube at
breakfast. X-Ray was afraid the Warden might have been listening.
One thing was certain: They weren't just digging to "build character." They were
definitely looking for something.
And whatever they were looking for, they were looking in the wrong place.
Stanley gazed out across the lake, toward the spot where he had been digging
yesterday when he found the gold tube. He dug the hole into his memory.

16
As Stanley entered the Wreck Room, he could hear X-Ray's voice from all the way
across the room.
"See what I'm saying," X-Ray said. "Am I right, or am I right?"
The other bodies in the room were little more than bags of flesh and bones, dumped
across broken chairs and couches. X-Ray was full of life, laughing and waving his arms
around as he talked. "Yo, Caveman, my man!" he called out.
Stanley made his way across the room.
"Hey, slide on over, Squid," said X-Ray. "Make room for the Caveman."
Stanley crashed on the couch.
He had looked for a hidden camera in the shower. He hadn't seen anything, and he
hoped the Warden hadn't either.
"What's the matter?" asked X-Ray. "You guys tired or something?" He laughed.
"Hey, keep it down, will you," groaned Zigzag. "I'm trying to watch TV."
Stanley glanced uncertainly at Zigzag, who was staring very intently at the busted
television screen.

33
The Warden greeted the boys at breakfast the next morning and went with them to
the holes. Four dug in the holes, and three tended to the wheelbarrows. "Glad you're
here, X-Ray," she said to him. "We need your sharp eyes."
Stanley spent more time pushing the wheelbarrow than digging, because he was
such a slow digger. He carted away the excess dirt and dumped it into previously dug
holes. He was careful not to dump any of it in the hole w here the gold tube was actually
found.
He could still see the tube in his mind. It seemed so familiar, but he just couldn't
place it. He thought that it might have been the lid to a fancy gold pen. K B could have
been the initials of a famous author. The only famous authors he could think of were
Charles Dickens, William Shakespeare, and Mark Twain. Besides, it didn't really look
like the top of a pen.
By lunchtime the Warden was beginning to lose her patience. She made them eat
quickly, so they could get back to work. "If you can't get them to work any faster," she
told Mr. Sir, "then you're going to have to climb down there and dig with them."
After that, everyone worked faster, especially when Mr. Sir was watching them.
Stanley practically ran when he pushed his wheelbarrow. Mr. Sir reminded them that
they weren't Girl Scouts.
They didn't quit digging until after every other group had finished.
Later, as Stanley sat sprawled across an understuffed chair, he tried to think of a
way to tell the Warden where the tube was really found, without getting himself or
X-Ray into trouble. It didn't seem possible. He even thought about sneaking out at night
and digging in that hole by himself. But the last thing he wanted to do after digging all
day was to "dig at night, too. Besides, the shovels were locked up at night, presumably
so they couldn't be used as weapons.
Mr. Pendanski entered the Wreck Room. "Stanley," he called as he made his way to
him.
"His name's Caveman," said X-Ray.
"Stanley," said Mr. Pendanski.
"My name's Caveman," said Stanley.
"Well, I have a letter here for someone named Stanley Yelnats," said Mr. Pendanski.
He turned over an envelope in his hands. "It doesn't say Caveman anywhere."
"Uh, thanks," Stanley said, taking it.
It was from his mother.
"Who's it from?" Squid asked. "Your mother?"
Stanley put it in the big pocket of his pants.
"Aren't you going to read it to us?" asked Armpit.
"Give him some space," said X-Ray. "If Caveman doesn't want to read it to us, he
doesn't have to. It's probably from his girlfriend."
Stanley smiled.
He read it later, after the other boys had gone to dinner.

34

Dear Stanley,
It was wonderful to hear from you. Your letter made me feel like one of the other
moms who can afford to send their kids to summer camp. I know it's not the same, but I
am very proud of you for trying to make the best of a bad situation. Who knows? Maybe
something good will come of this.
Your father thinks he is real close to a breakthrough on his sneaker project. I hope
so. The landlord is threatening to evict us because of the odor.
I feel sorry for the little old lady who lived in a shoe. It must have smelled awful!
Love from both of us,
"What's so funny?" Zero asked.
It startled him. He thought Zero had gone to dinner with the others.
"Nothing. Just something my mom wrote."
"What'd she say?" Zero asked.
"Nothing."
"Oh, sorry," said Zero.
"Well, see my dad is trying to invent a way to recycle old sneakers. So the
apartment kind of smells bad, because he's always cooking these old sneakers. So
anyway, in the letter my mom said she felt sorry for that little old lady who lived in a
shoe, you know, because it must have smelled bad in there."
Zero stared blankly at him.
"You know, the nursery rhyme?"
Zero said nothing.
"You've heard the nursery rhyme about the little old lady who lived in a shoe?"
"No."
Stanley was amazed.
"How does it go?" asked Zero.
"Didn't you ever watch Sesame Street?" Stanley asked.
Zero stared blankly.
Stanley headed on to dinner. He would have felt pretty silly reciting nursery rhymes
at Camp Green Lake.

17
For the next week and a half, the boys continued to dig in and around the area where
X-Ray had supposedly found the gold tube. They widened X-Ray's hole, as well as the
holes Armpit and Squid had been digging, until the fourth day, when all three holes met
and formed one big hole.
As the days wore on, the Warden became less and less patient. She arrived later in
the morning and left earlier in the afternoon. Meanwhile, the boys continued to dig later
and later.
"This is no bigger than it was when I left you yesterday," she said after arriving late
one morning, well after sunrise. "What have you been doing down there?"

35

"Nothing," said Squid.
It was the wrong thing to say.
At just that moment, Armpit was returning from a bathroom break.
"How nice of you to join us," she said. "And what have you been doing?"
"I had to . . . you know . . . go."
The Warden jabbed at Armpit with her pitchfork, knocking him backward into the
big hole. The pitchfork left three holes in the front of his shirt, and three tiny spots of
blood.
"You're giving these boys too much water," the Warden told Mr. Pendanski.
They continued to dig until late afternoon, long after all the other groups had
finished for the day. Stanley was down in the big hole, along with the other six boys.
They had stopped using the wheelbarrows.
He dug his shovel into the side of the hole. He scooped up some dirt, and was
raising it up to the surface when Zigzag's shovel caught him in the side of the head.
He collapsed.
He wasn't sure if he passed out or not. He looked up to see Zigzag's wild head
staring down at him. "I ain't digging that dirt up," Zigzag said. "That's your dirt."
"Hey, Mom!" Magnet called. "Caveman's been hurt."
Stanley brought his fingers up the side of his neck. He felt his wet blood and a pretty
big gash just below his ear.
Magnet helped Stanley to his feet, then up and out of the hole. Mr. Sir made a
bandage out of a piece of his sack of sunflower seeds and taped it over Stanley's wound.
Then he told him to get back to work. "It isn't nap time."
When Stanley returned to the hole, Zigzag was waiting for him.
"That's your dirt," Zigzag said. "You have to dig it up. It's covering up my dirt."
Stanley felt a little dizzy. He could see a small pile of dirt. It took him a moment to
realize that it was the dirt which had been on his shovel when he was hit.
He scooped it up, then Zigzag dug his shovel into the ground underneath where
"Stanley's dirt" had been.

18
The next morning Mr. Sir marched the boys to another section of the lake, and each
boy dug his own hole, five feet deep and five feet wide. Stanley was glad to be away
from the big hole. At least now he knew just how much he had to dig for the day. And it
was a relief not to have other shovels swinging past his face, or the Warden hanging
around.
He dug his shovel into the dirt, then slowly turned to dump it into a pile. He had to
make his turns smooth and slow. If he jerked too quickly, he felt a throbbing pain just
above his neck where Zigzag's shovel had hit him.

36
That part of his head, between his neck and ear, was considerably swollen. There
were no mirrors in camp, but he imagined he looked like he had a hard-boiled egg
sticking out of him.
The remainder of his body hardly hurt at all. His muscles had strengthened, and his
hands were tough and callused. He was still the slowest digger, but not all that much
slower than Magnet. Less than thirty minutes after Magnet returned to camp, Stanley
spat into his hole.
After his shower, he put his dirty clothes in his crate and got out his box of
stationery. He stayed in the tent to write the letter so Squid and the other boys wouldn't
make fun of him for writing to his mother.
Dear Mom and Dad,
Camp is hard, but challenging. We've been running obstacle courses, and have to
swim long distances on the lake. Tomorrow we learn...
He stopped writing as Zero walked into the tent, then returned to his letter. He didn't
care what Zero thought. Zero was nobody.
... to rock climb. I know that sounds scary, but don't worry,
Zero was standing beside him now, watching him write.
Stanley turned, and felt his neck throb. "I don't like it when you read over my
shoulder, okay?"
Zero said nothing.
I'll be careful. It's not all fun and games here, but I think I'm getting a lot out of it. It
builds character. The other boys...
"I don't know how," said Zero.
"What?"
"Can you teach me?"
Stanley didn't know what he was talking about. "Teach you what, to rock climb?"
Zero stared at him with penetrating eyes.
"What?" said Stanley. He was hot, tired, and sore.
"I want to learn to read and write," said Zero.
Stanley let out a short laugh. He wasn't laughing at Zero. He was just surprised. All
this time he had thought Zero was reading over his shoulder. "Sorry," he said. "I don't
know how to teach."
After digging all day, he didn't have the strength to try to teach Zero to read and
write. He needed to save his energy for the people who counted.
"You don't have to teach me to write," said Zero. "Just to read. I don't have anybody
to write to."
"Sorry," Stanley said again.

37
His muscles and hands weren't the only parts of his body that had toughened over
the past several weeks. His heart had hardened as well.
He finished his letter. He barely had enough moisture in his mouth to seal and stamp
the envelope. It seemed that no matter how much water he drank, he was always thirsty.

19
He was awakened one night by a strange noise. At first he thought it might have
been some kind of animal, and it frightened him. But as the sleep cleared from his head,
he realized that the noise was coming from the cot next to him.
Squid was crying.
"You okay?" Stanley whispered.
Squid's head jerked around. He sniffed and caught his breath. "Yeah, I just . . . I'm
fine," he whispered, and sniffed again.
In the morning Stanley asked Squid if he was feeling better.
"What are you, my mother?" asked Squid.
Stanley raised and lowered one shoulder.
"I got allergies, okay?" Squid said.
"Okay," said Stanley.
"You open your mouth again, and I'll break your jaw."
Stanley kept his mouth shut most of the time. He didn't talk too much to any of the
boys, afraid that he might say the wrong thing. They called him Caveman and all that,
but he couldn't forget that they were dangerous, too. They were all here for a reason. As
Mr. Sir would say, this wasn't a Girl Scout camp.
Stanley was thankful that there were no racial problems. X-Ray, Armpit, and Zero
were black. He, Squid, and Zigzag were white. Magnet was Hispanic. On the lake they
were all the same reddish brown color? the color of dirt.
He looked up from his hole to see the water truck and its trailing dust cloud. His
canteen was still almost a quarter full. He quickly drank it down, then took his place in
line, behind Magnet and in front of Zero. The air was thick with heat, dust, and exhaust
fumes.
Mr. Sir filled their canteens.
The truck pulled away. Stanley was back in his hole, shovel in hand, when he heard
Magnet call out. "Anybody want some sunflower seeds?"
Magnet was standing at ground level, holding a sack of seeds. He popped a handful
into his mouth, chewed, and swallowed, shells and all.
"Over here," called X-Ray.
The sack looked to be about half full. Magnet rolled up the top, then tossed it to
X-Ray.
"How'd you get them without Mr. Sir seeing you?" asked Armpit.
"I can't help it," Magnet said. He held both hands up, wiggled his fingers, and
laughed. "My fingers are like little magnets."

38

The sack went from X-Ray to Armpit to Squid.
"It's sure good to eat something that doesn't come from a can," said Armpit.
Squid tossed the sack to Zigzag.
Stanley knew it would come to him next. He didn't even want it. From the moment
Magnet shouted, "Anybody want some sunflower seeds," he knew there would be
trouble. Mr. Sir was sure to come back. And anyway, the salted shells would only make
him thirsty.
"Coming your way, Caveman," said Zigzag. "Airmail and special delivery . . ."
It's unclear whether the seeds spilled before they got to Stanley or after he dropped
the bag. It seemed to him that Zigzag hadn't rolled up the top before throwing it, and
that was the reason he didn't catch it.
But it all happened very fast. One moment the sack was flying through the air, and
the next thing Stanley knew the sack was in his hole and the seeds were spilled across
the dirt.
"Oh, man!" said Magnet.
"Sorry," Stanley said as he tried to sweep the seeds back into the sack.
"I don't want to eat dirt," said X-Ray.
Stanley didn't know what to do.
"The truck's coming!" shouted Zigzag.
Stanley looked up at the approaching dust cloud, then back down at the spilled
seeds. He was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
What else is new?
He dug his shovel into his hole, and tried to turn over the dirt and bury the seeds.
What he should have done, he realized later, was knock one of his dirt piles back
into his hole. But the idea of putting dirt into his hole was unthinkable.
"Hello, Mr. Sir," said X-Ray. "Back so soon?"
"It seems like you were just here," said Armpit.
"Time flies when you're having fun," said Magnet.
Stanley continued to turn the dirt over in his hole.
"You Girl Scouts having a good time?" asked Mr. Sir. He moved from one hole to
another. He kicked a dirt pile by Magnet's hole, then he moved toward Stanley.
Stanley could see two seeds at the bottom of his hole. As he tried to cover them up,
he unearthed a corner of the sack.
"Well, what do you know, Caveman?" said Mr. Sir, standing over him. "It looks
like you found something."
Stanley didn't know what to do.
"Dig it out," Mr. Sir said. "We'll take it to the Warden. Maybe she'll give you the
rest of the day off."
"It's not anything," Stanley muttered.
"Let me be the judge of that," said Mr. Sir.
Stanley reached down and pulled up the empty burlap sack. He tried to hand it to Mr.
Sir, but he wouldn't take it.
"So, tell me, Caveman," said Mr. Sir. "How did my sack of sunflower seeds get in
your hole?"

39

"I stole it from your truck."
"You did?"
"Yes, Mr. Sir."
"What happened to all the sunflower seeds?"
"I ate them."
"By yourself."
"Yes, Mr. Sir."
"Hey, Caveman!" shouted Armpit. "How come you didn't share any with us?"
"That's cold, man," said X-Ray.
"I thought you were our friend," said Magnet.
Mr. Sir looked around from one boy to another, then back to Stanley. "We'll see
what the Warden has to say about this. Let's go."
Stanley climbed up out of his hole and followed Mr. Sir to the truck. He still held
the empty sack.
It felt good to sit inside the truck, out of the direct rays of the sun. Stanley was
surprised he could feel good about anything at the moment, but he did. It felt good to sit
down on a comfortable seat for a change. And as the truck bounced along the dirt, he
was able to appreciate the air blowing through the open window onto his hot and
sweaty face.

20
It felt good to walk in the shade of the two oak trees. Stanley wondered if this was
how a condemned man felt on his way to the electric chair? appreciating all of the good
things in life for the last time.
They had to step around holes to get to the cabin door. Stanley was surprised to see
so many around the cabin. He would have expected the Warden to not want the campers
digging so close to her home. But several holes were right up against the cabin wall.
The holes were closer together here as well, and were of different shapes and sizes.
Mr. Sir knocked on the door. Stanley still held the empty sack.
"Yes?" the Warden said, opening the door.
"There's been a little trouble out on the lake," Mr. Sir said. "Caveman will tell you
all about it."
The Warden stared at Mr. Sir a moment, then her gaze turned toward Stanley. He
felt nothing but dread now.
"Come in, I suppose," said the Warden. "You're letting the cold out."
It was air-conditioned inside her cabin. The television was going. She picked up the
remote and turned it off.
She sat down on a canvas chair. She was barefoot and wearing shorts. Her legs were
as freckled as her face and arms.
"So what is it you have to tell me?"
Stanley took a breath to steady himself. "While Mr. Sir was filling the canteens, I
snuck into the truck and stole his sack of sunflower seeds."

40

"I see." She turned to Mr. Sir. "That's why you brought him here?"
"Yes, but I think he's lying. I think someone else stole the sack, and Caveman is
covering up for X-Ray or somebody. It was a twenty-pound sack, and he claims to have
eaten them all by himself." He took the sack from Stanley and handed it to the Warden.
"I see," the Warden said again.
"The sack wasn't full," said Stanley. "And I spilled a lot. You can check my hole."
"In that room, Caveman, there's a small flowered case. Will you get it for me,
please?" She pointed to a door.
Stanley looked at the door, then at the Warden, then back at the door. He slowly
walked toward it.
It was a kind of dressing room, with a sink and a mirror. Next to the sink he saw the
case, white with pink roses.
He brought it back out to the Warden, and she set it on the glass coffee table in front
of her. She unclasped the latch and opened the case.
It was a makeup case. Stanley's mother had one similar to it. He saw several bottles
of nail polish, polish remover, a couple of lipstick tubes, and other jars and powders.
The Warden held up a small jar of dark-red nail polish. "You see this, Caveman?"
He nodded.
"This is my special nail polish. Do you see the dark rich color? You can't buy that in
a store. I have to make it myself."
Stanley had no idea why she was showing it to him. He wondered why the Warden
would ever have the need to wear nail polish or makeup.
"Do you want to know my secret ingredient?"
He raised and lowered one shoulder.
The Warden opened the bottle. "Rattlesnake venom." With a small paintbrush she
began applying it to the nails on her left hand. "It's perfectly harmless . . . when it's dry."
She finished her left hand. She waved it in the air for a few seconds, then began
painting the nails on her right hand. "It's only toxic while it's wet."
She finished painting her nails, then stood up. She reached over and touched
Stanley's face with her fingers. She ran her sharp wet nails very gently down his cheek.
He felt his skin tingle.
The nail on her pinkie just barely touched the wound behind his ear. A sharp sting
of pain caused him to jump back.
The Warden turned to face Mr. Sir, who was sitting on the fireplace hearth.
"So you think he stole your sunflower seeds?"
"No, he says he stole them, but I think it was? "
She stepped toward him and struck him across the face.
Mr. Sir stared at her. He had three long red marks slanting across the left side of his
face. Stanley didn't know if the redness was caused by her nail polish or his blood.
It took a moment for the venom to sink in. Suddenly, Mr. Sir screamed and clutched
his face with both hands. He let himself fall over, rolling off the hearth and onto the rug.
The Warden spoke softly. "I don't especially care about your sunflower seeds."
Mr. Sir moaned.
"If you must know," said the Warden, "I liked it better when you smoked."

41
For a second, Mr. Sir's pain seemed to recede. He took several long, deep breaths.
Then his head jerked violently, and he let out a shrill scream, worse than the one before.
The Warden turned to Stanley. "I suggest you go back to your hole now."
Stanley started to go, but Mr. Sir lay in the way. Stanley could see the muscles on
his face jump and twitch. His body writhed in agony.
Stanley stepped carefully over him. "Is he? ?"
"Excuse me?" said the Warden.
Stanley was too frightened to speak.
"He's not going to die," the Warden said. "Unfortunately for you."