It was a long walk back to his hole. Stanley looked out through the haze of heat and
dirt at the other boys, lowering and raising their shovels. Group D was the farthest
away.
He realized that once again he would be digging long after everyone else had quit.
He hoped he'd finish before Mr. Sir recovered. He didn't want to be out there alone with
Mr. Sir.
He won't die, the Warden had said. Unfortunately for you.
Walking across the desolate wasteland, Stanley thought about his
great-grandfather? not the pig stealer but the pig stealer's son, the one who was robbed
by Kissin' Kate Barlow.
He tried to imagine how he must have felt after Kissin' Kate had left him stranded in
the desert. It probably wasn't a whole lot different from the way he himself felt now.
Kate Barlow had left his great-grandfather to face the hot barren desert. The Warden
had left Stanley to face Mr. Sir.
Somehow his great-grandfather had survived for seventeen days, before he was
rescued by a couple of rattlesnake hunters. He was insane when they found him.
When he was asked how he had lived so long, he said he "found refuge on God's
thumb."
He spent nearly a month in a hospital. He ended up marrying one of the nurses.
Nobody ever knew what he meant by God's thumb, including himself.
Stanley heard a twitching sound. He stopped in mid-step, with one foot still in the
air.
A rattlesnake lay coiled beneath his foot. Its tail was pointed upward, rattling.
Stanley backed his leg away, then turned and ran.
The rattlesnake didn't chase after him. It had rattled its tail to warn him to stay away.
"Thanks for the warning," Stanley whispered as his heart pounded.
The rattlesnake would be a lot more dangerous if it didn't have a rattle.
"Hey, Caveman!" called Armpit. "You're still alive."
"What'd the Warden say?" asked X-Ray.
"What'd you tell her?" asked Magnet.

42

"I told her I stole the seeds," said Stanley.
"Good going," said Magnet.
"What'd she do?" asked Zigzag.
Stanley shrugged one shoulder. "Nothing. She got mad at Mr. Sir for bothering
her."
He didn't feel like going into details. If he didn't talk about it, then maybe it didn't
happen.
He went over to his hole, and to his surprise it was nearly finished. He stared at it,
amazed. It didn't make sense.
Or perhaps it did. He smiled. Since he had taken the blame for the sunflower seeds,
he realized, the other boys had dug his hole for him.
"Hey, thanks," he said.
"Don't look at me," said X-Ray.
Confused, Stanley looked around? from Magnet, to Armpit, to Zigzag, to Squid.
None of them took credit for it.
Then he turned to Zero, who had been quietly digging in his hole since Stanley's
return. Zero's hole was smaller than all the others.

22
Stanley was the first one finished. He spat in his hole, then showered and changed
into his cleaner set of clothes. It had been three days since the laundry was done, so
even his clean set was dirty and smelly. Tomorrow, these would become his work
clothes, and his other set would be washed.
He could think of no reason why Zero would dig his hole for him. Zero didn't even
get any sunflower seeds.
"I guess he likes to dig holes," Armpit had said.
"He's a mole," Zigzag had said. "I think he eats dirt."
"Moles don't eat dirt," X-Ray had pointed out. "Worms eat dirt."
"Hey, Zero?" Squid had asked. "Are you a mole or a worm?"
Zero had said nothing.
Stanley never even thanked him. But now he sat on his cot and waited for Zero to
return from the shower room.
"Thanks," he said as Zero entered through the tent flap.
Zero glanced at him, then went over to the crates, where he deposited his dirty
clothes and towel.
"Why'd you help me?" Stanley asked.
Zero turned around. "You didn't steal the sunflower seeds," he said.
"So, neither did you," said Stanley.
Zero stared at him. His eyes seemed to expand, and it was almost as if Zero were
looking right through him. "You didn't steal the sneakers," he said.
Stanley said nothing.
He watched Zero walk out of the tent. If anybody had X-ray vision, it was Zero.

43

"Wait!" he called, then hurried out after him.
Zero had stopped just outside the tent, and Stanley almost ran into him.
"I'll try to teach you to read if you want," Stanley offered. "I don't know if I know
how to teach, but I'm not that worn-out today, since you dug a lot of my hole."
A big smile spread across Zero's face.
They returned to the tent, where they were less likely to be bothered. Stanley got his
box of stationery and a pen out of his crate. They sat on the ground.
"Do you know the alphabet?" Stanley asked.
For a second, he thought he saw a flash of defiance in Zero's eyes, but then it passed.
"I think I know some of it," Zero said. "A, B, C, D."
"Keep going," said Stanley.
Zero's eyes looked upward. "E . . ."
"F," said Stanley.
"G," said Zero. He blew some air out of the side of his mouth. "H . . . I . . . K, P."
"H, I, J, K, L," Stanley said.
"That's right," said Zero. "I've heard it before. I just don't have it memorized
exactly."
"That's all right," said Stanley. "Here, I'll say the whole thing, just to kind of refresh
your memory, then you can try it."
He recited the alphabet for Zero, then Zero repeated it without a single mistake.
Not bad for a kid who had never seen Sesame Street!
"Well, I've heard it before, somewhere," Zero said, trying to act like it was nothing,
but his big smile gave him away.
The next step was harder. Stanley had to figure out how to teach him to recognize
each letter. He gave Zero a piece of paper, and took a piece for himself. "I guess we'll
start with A."
He printed a capital A, and then Zero copied it on his sheet of paper. The paper
wasn't lined, which made it more difficult, but Zero's A wasn't bad, just a little big.
Stanley told him he needed to write smaller, or else they'd run out of paper real quick.
Zero printed it smaller.
"Actually, there are two ways to write each letter," Stanley said, as he realized this
was going to be even harder than he thought. "That's a capital A. But usually you'll see
a small a. You only have capitals at the beginning of a word, and only if it's the start of
a sentence, or if it's a proper noun, like a name."
Zero nodded as if he understand, but Stanley knew he had made very little sense.
He printed a lowercase a, and Zero copied it.
"So there are fifty-two," said Zero.
Stanley didn't know what he was talking about.
"Instead of twenty-six letters. There are really fifty-two."
Stanley looked at him, surprised. "I guess that's right. How'd you figure that out?"
he asked.
Zero said nothing.
"Did you add?"
Zero said nothing.

44

"Did you multiply?"
"That's just how many there are," said Zero.
Stanley raised and lowered one shoulder. He didn't even know how Zero knew there
were twenty-six in the first place. Did he count them as he recited them?
He had Zero write a few more upper- and lowercase A's, and then he moved on to a
capital B. This was going to take a long time, he realized.
"You can teach me ten letters a day," suggested Zero. "Five capitals and five smalls.
After five days I'll know them all. Except on the last day I'll have to do twelve. Six
capitals and six smalls."
Again Stanley stared at him, amazed that he was able to figure all that out.
Zero must have thought he was staring for a different reason, because he said, "I'll
dig part of your hole every day. I can dig for about an hour, then you can teach me for an
hour. And since I'm a faster digger anyway, our holes will get done about the same time.
I won't have to wait for you."
"Okay," Stanley agreed.
As Zero was printing his B's, Stanley asked him how he figured out it would take
five days. "Did you multiply? Did you divide?"
"That's just what it is," Zero said.
"It's good math," said Stanley.
"I'm not stupid," Zero said. "I know everybody thinks I am. I just don't like
answering their questions."
Later that night, as he lay on his cot, Stanley reconsidered the deal he had made with
Zero. Getting a break every day would be a relief, but he knew X-Ray wouldn't like it.
He wondered if there might be some way Zero would agree to dig part of X-Ray's hole
as well. But then again, why should he? I'm the one teaching Zero. I need the break so
I'll have the energy to ' teach him. I'm the one who took the blame for the sunflower
seeds. I'm the one who Mr. Sir is mad at.
He closed his eyes, and images from the Warden's cabin floated inside his head: her
red fingernails, Mr. Sir writhing on the floor, her flowered makeup kit.
He opened his eyes.
He suddenly realized where he'd seen the gold tube before.
He'd seen it in his mother's bathroom, and he'd seen it again in the Warden's cabin.
It was half of a lipstick container.
KB?
KB?
He felt a jolt of astonishment.
His mouth silently formed the name Kate Barlow, as he wondered if it really could
have belonged to the kissin' outlaw.

23

45
One hundred and ten years ago, Green Lake was the largest lake in Texas. It was
full of clear cool water, and it sparkled like a giant emerald in the sun. It was especially
beautiful in the spring, when the peach trees, which lined the shore, bloomed with pink
and rose-colored blossoms.
There was always a town picnic on the Fourth of July. They'd play games, dance,
sing, and swim in the lake to keep cool. Prizes were awarded for the best peach pie and
peach jam.
A special prize was given every year to Miss Katherine Barlow for her fabulous
spiced peaches. No one else even tried to make spiced peaches, because they knew
none could be as delicious as hers.
Every summer Miss Katherine would pick bushels of peaches and preserve them in
jars with cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, and other spices which she kept secret. The jarred
peaches would last all winter. They probably would have lasted a lot longer than that,
but they were always eaten by the end of winter.
It was said that Green Lake was "heaven on earth" and that Miss Katherine's spiced
peaches were "food for the angels."
Katherine Barlow was the town's only schoolteacher. She taught in an old one-room
schoolhouse. It was old even then. The roof leaked. The windows wouldn't open. The
door hung crooked on its bent hinges.
She was a wonderful teacher, full of knowledge and full of life. The children loved
her.
She taught classes in the evening for adults, and many of the adults loved her as
well. She was very pretty. Her classes were often full of young men, who were a lot
more interested in the teacher than they were in getting an education.
But all they ever got was an education.
One such young man was Trout Walker. His real name was Charles Walker, but
everyone called him Trout because his two feet smelled like a couple of dead fish.
This wasn't entirely Trout's fault. He had an incurable foot fungus. In fact, it was the
same foot fungus that a hundred and ten years later would afflict the famous ballplayer
Clyde Livingston. But at least Clyde Livingston showered every day.
"I take a bath every Sunday morning," Trout would brag, "whether I need to or not."
Most everyone in the town of Green Lake expected Miss Katherine to marry Trout
Walker. He was the son of the richest man in the county. His family owned most of the
peach trees and all the land on the east side of the lake.
Trout often showed up at night school but never paid attention. He talked in class
and was disrespectful of the students around him. He was loud and stupid.
A lot of men in town were not educated. That didn't bother Miss Katherine. She
knew they'd spent most of their lives working on farms and ranches and hadn't had
much schooling. That was why she was there? to teach them.
But Trout didn't want to learn. He seemed to be proud of his stupidity.
"How'd you like to take a ride on my new boat this Saturday?" he asked her one
evening after class.
"No, thank you," said Miss Katherine.
"We've got a brand-new boat," he said. "You don't even have to row it."

46

"Yes, I know," said Miss Katherine.
Everyone in town had seen? and heard? the Walkers' new boat. It made a horrible
loud noise and spewed ugly black smoke over the beautiful lake.
Trout had always gotten everything he ever wanted. He found it hard to believe that
Miss Katherine had turned him down. He pointed his finger at her and said, "No one
ever says 'No' to Charles Walker!"
"I believe I just did," said Katherine Barlow.

24
Stanley was half asleep as he got in line for breakfast, but the sight of Mr. Sir
awakened him. The left side of Mr. Sir's face had swollen to the size of half a
cantaloupe. There were three dark-purple jagged lines running down his cheek where
the Warden had scratched him.
The other boys in Stanley's tent had obviously seen Mr. Sir as well, but they had the
good sense not to say anything. Stanley put a carton of juice and a plastic spoon on his
tray. He kept his eyes down and hardly breathed as Mr. Sir ladled some oatmeal-like
stuff into his bowl.
He brought his tray to the table. Behind him, a boy from one of the other tents said,
"Hey, what happened to your face?"
There was a crash.
Stanley turned to see Mr. Sir holding the boy's head against the oatmeal pot. "Is
something wrong with my face?"
The boy tried to speak but couldn't. Mr. Sir had him by the throat.
"Does anyone see anything wrong with my face?" asked Mr. Sir, as he continued to
choke the boy.
Nobody said anything.
Mr. Sir let the boy go. His head banged against the table as he fell to the ground.
Mr. Sir stood over him and asked, "How does my face look to you now?"
A gurgling sound came out of the boy's mouth, then he managed to gasp the word,
"Fine."
"I'm kind of handsome, don't you think?"
"Yes, Mr. Sir."
Out on the lake, the other boys asked Stanley what he knew about Mr. Sir's face, but
he just shrugged and dug his hole. If he didn't talk about it, maybe it would go away.
He worked as hard and as fast as he could, not trying to pace himself. He just
wanted to get off the lake and away from Mr. Sir as soon as possible. Besides, he knew
he'd get a break.
"Whenever you're ready, just let me know," Zero had said.
The first time the water truck came, it was driven by Mr. Pendanski. The second
time, Mr. Sir was driving.

47
No one said anything except "Thank you, Mr. Sir" as he filled each canteen. No one
even dared to look at his grotesque face.
As Stanley waited, he ran his tongue over the roof of his mouth and inside his
cheeks. His mouth was as dry and as parched as the lake. The bright sun reflected off
the side mirror of the truck, and Stanley had to shield his eyes with his hand.
"Thank you, Mr. Sir," said Magnet, as he took his canteen from him.
"You thirsty, Caveman?" Mr. Sir asked.
"Yes, Mr. Sir," Stanley said, handing his canteen to him.
Mr. Sir opened the nozzle, and the water flowed out of the tank, but it did not go
into Stanley's canteen. Instead, he held the canteen right next to the stream of water.
Stanley watched the water splatter on the dirt, where it was quickly absorbed by the
thirsty ground.
Mr. Sir let the water run for about thirty seconds, then stopped. "You want more?"
he asked.
Stanley didn't say anything.
Mr. Sir turned the water back on, and again Stanley watched it pour onto the dirt.
"There, that should be plenty." He handed Stanley his empty canteen.
Stanley stared at the dark spot on the ground, which quickly shrank before his eyes.
"Thank you, Mr. Sir," he said.

25
There was a doctor in the town of Green Lake, one hundred and ten years ago. His
name was Dr. Hawthorn. And whenever people got sick, they would go see Doc
Hawthorn. But they would also see Sam, the onion man.
"Onions! Sweet, fresh onions!" Sam would call, as he and his donkey, Mary Lou,
walked up and down the dirt roads of Green Lake. Mary Lou pulled a cart full of
onions.
Sam's onion field was somewhere on the other side of the lake. Once or twice a
week he would tow across the lake and pick a new batch to fill the cart. Sam had big
strong arms, but it would still take all day for him to row across the lake and another day
for him to return. Most of the time he would leave Mary Lou in a shed, which the
Walkers let him use at no charge, but sometimes he would take Mary Lou on his boat
with him.
Sam claimed that Mary Lou was almost fifty years old, which was, and still is,
extraordinarily old for a donkey.
"She eats nothing but raw onions," Sam would say, holding up a white onion
between his dark fingers. "It's nature's magic vegetable. If a person ate nothing but raw
onions, he could live to be two hundred years old."
Sam was not much older than twenty, so nobody was quite sure that Mary Lou was
really as old as he said she was. How would he know?
Still, nobody ever argued with Sam. And whenever they were sick, they would go
not only to Doc Hawthorn but also to Sam.

48

Sam always gave the same advice: "Eat plenty of onions."
He said that onions were good for the digestion, the liver, the stomach, the lungs,
the heart, and the brain. "If you don't believe me, just look at old Mary Lou here. She's
never been sick a day in her life."
He also had many different ointments, lotions, syrups, and pastes all made out of
onion juice and different parts of the onion plant. This one cured asthma. That one was
for warts and pimples. Another was a remedy for arthritis.
He even had a special ointment which he claimed would cure baldness. "Just rub it
on your husband's head every night when he's sleeping, Mrs. Collingwood, and soon his
hair will be as thick and as long as Mary Lou's tail."
Doc Hawthorn did not resent Sam. The folks of Green Lake were afraid to take
chances. They would get regular medicine from Doc Hawthorn and onion concoctions
from Sam. After they got over their illness, no one could be sure, not even Doc
Hawthorn, which of the two treatments had done the trick.
Doc Hawthorn was almost completely bald, and in the morning his head often
smelled like onions.
Whenever Katherine Barlow bought onions, she always bought an extra one or two
and would let Mary Lou eat them out of her hand.
"Is something wrong?" Sam asked her one day as she was feeding Mary Lou. "You
seem distracted."
"Oh, just the weather," said Miss Katherine. "It looks like rain clouds moving in."
"Me and Mary Lou, we like the rain," said Sam.
"Oh, I like it fine," said Miss Katherine, as she rubbed the donkey's rough hair on
top of its head. "It's just that the roof leaks in the schoolhouse."
"I can fix that," said Sam.
"What are you going to do?" Katherine joked. "Fill the holes with onion paste?"
Sam laughed. "I'm good with my hands," he told her. "I built my own boat. If it
leaked, I'd be in big trouble."
Katherine couldn't help but notice his strong, firm hands.
They made a deal. He agreed to fix the leaky roof in exchange for six jars of spiced
peaches.
It took Sam a week to fix the roof, because he could only work in the afternoons,
after school let out and before night classes began. Sam wasn't allowed to attend classes
because he was a Negro, but they let him fix the building.
Miss Katherine usually stayed in the schoolhouse, grading papers and such, while
Sam worked on the roof. She enjoyed what little conversation they were able to have,
shouting up and down to each other. She was surprised by his interest in poetry. When
he took a break, she would sometimes read a poem to him. On more than one occasion,
she would start to read a poem by Poe or Longfellow, only to hear him finish it for her,
from memory.
She was sad when the roof was finished.
"Is something wrong?" he asked.

49
"No, you did a wonderful job," she said. "It's just that . . . the windows won't open.
The children and I would enjoy a breeze now and then."
"I can fix that," said Sam.
She gave him two more jars of peaches and Sam fixed the windows.
It was easier to talk to him when he was working on the windows. He told her about
his secret onion field on the other side of the lake, "where the onions grow all year
round, and the water runs uphill."
When the windows were fixed, she complained that her desk wobbled.
"I can fix that," said Sam.
The next time she saw him, she mentioned that "the door doesn't hang straight," and
she got to spend another afternoon with him while he fixed the door.
By the end of the first semester, Onion Sam had turned the old run-down
schoolhouse into a well-crafted, freshly painted jewel of a building that the whole town
was proud of. People passing by would stop and admire it. "That's our schoolhouse. It
shows how much we value education here in Green Lake."
The only person who wasn't happy with it was Miss Katherine. She'd run out of
things needing to be fixed.
She sat at her desk one afternoon, listening to the pitter-patter of the rain on the roof.
No water leaked into the classroom, except for the few drops that came from her eyes.
"Onions! Hot sweet onions!" Sam called, out on the street.
She ran to him. She wanted to throw her arms around him but couldn't bring herself
to do it. Instead she hugged Mary Lou's neck.
"Is something wrong?" he asked her.
"Oh, Sam," she said. "My heart is breaking."
"I can fix that," said Sam.
She turned to him.
He took hold of both of her hands, and kissed her.
Because of the rain, there was nobody else out on the street. Even if there was,
Katherine and Sam wouldn't have noticed. They were lost in their own world.
At that moment, however, Hattie Parker stepped out of the general store. They
didn't see her, but she saw them. She pointed her quivering finger in their direction and
whispered, "God will punish you!"

26
There were no telephones, but word spread quickly through the small town. By the
end of the day, everyone in Green Lake had heard that the schoolteacher had kissed the
onion picker.
Not one child showed up for school the next morning.
Miss Katherine sat alone in the classroom and wondered if she had lost track of the
day of the week. Perhaps it was Saturday. It wouldn't have surprised her. Her brain and
heart had been spinning ever since Sam kissed her.

50
She heard a noise outside the door, then suddenly a mob of men and women came
storming into the school building. They were led by Trout Walker.
"There she is!" Trout shouted. "The Devil Woman!"
The mob was turning over desks and ripping down bulletin boards.
"She's been poisoning your children's brains with books," Trout declared.
They began piling all the books in the center of the room.
"Think about what you are doing!" cried Miss Katherine.
Someone made a grab for her, tearing her dress, but she managed to get out of the
building. She ran to the sheriff's office.
The sheriff had his feet up on his desk and was drinking from a bottle of whiskey.
"Mornin', Miss Katherine," he said.
"They're destroying the schoolhouse," she said, gasping for breath. "They'll burn it
to the ground if someone doesn't stop them!"
"Just calm your pretty self down a second," the sheriff said in a slow drawl. "And
tell me what you're talking about." He got up from his desk and walked over to her.
"Trout Walker has? "
"Now don't go saying nothing bad about Charles Walker," said the sheriff.
"We don't have much time!" urged Katherine. "You've got to stop them."
"You're sure pretty," said the sheriff.
Miss Katherine stared at him in horror.
"Kiss me," said the sheriff.
She slapped him across the face.
He laughed. "You kissed the onion picker. Why won't you kiss me?"
She tried to slap him again, but he caught her by the hand.
She tried to wriggle free. "You're drunk!" she yelled.
"I always get drunk before a hanging."
"A hanging? Who? "
"It's against the law for a Negro to kiss a white woman."
"Well, then you'll have to hang me, too," said Katherine. "Because I kissed him
back."
"It ain't against the law for you to kiss him," the sheriff explained. "Just for him to
kiss you."
"We're all equal under the eyes of God," she declared.
The sheriff laughed. "Then if Sam and I are equal, why won't you kiss me?" He
laughed again. "I'll make you a deal. One sweet kiss, and I won't hang your boyfriend.
I'll just run him out of town."
Miss Katherine jerked her hand free. As she hurried to the door, she heard the
sheriff say, "The law will punish Sam. And God will punish you."
She stepped back into the street and saw smoke rising from the schoolhouse. She
ran down to the lakefront, where Sam was hitching Mary Lou to the onion cart.
"Thank God, I found you," she sighed, hugging him. "We've got to get out of here.
Now!"
"What? "

51
"Someone must have seen us kissing yesterday," she said. "They set fire to the
schoolhouse. The sheriff said he's going to hang you!"
Sam hesitated for a moment, as if he couldn't quite believe it. He didn't want to
believe it. "C'mon, Mary Lou."
"We have to leave Mary Lou behind," said Katherine.
Sam stared at her a moment. There were tears in his eyes. "Okay."
Sam's boat was in the water, tied to a tree by a long rope. He untied it, and they
waded through the water and climbed aboard. His powerful arms rowed them away
from the shore.
But his powerful arms were no match for Trout Walker's motorized boat. They were
little more than halfway across the lake when Miss Katherine heard the loud roar of the
engine. Then she saw the ugly black smoke . . .
These are the facts:
The Walker boat smashed into Sam's boat. Sam was shot and killed in the water.
Katherine Barlow was rescued against her wishes. When they returned to the shore, she
saw Mary Lou's body lying on the ground. The donkey had been shot in the head.
That all happened one hundred and ten years ago. Since then, not one drop of rain
has fallen on Green Lake.
You make the decision: Whom did God punish?
Three days after Sam's death, Miss Katherine shot the sheriff while he was sitting in
his chair drinking a cup of coffee. Then she carefully applied a fresh coat of red lipstick
and gave him the kiss he had asked for.
For the next twenty years Kissin' Kate Barlow was one of the most feared outlaws
in all the West.

27
Stanley dug his shovel into the ground. His hole was about three and a half feet deep
in the center. He grunted as he pried up some dirt, then flung it off to the side. The sun
was almost directly overhead.
He glanced at his canteen lying beside his hole. He knew it was half full, but he
didn't take a drink just yet. He had to drink sparingly, because he didn't know who
would be driving the water truck the next time it came.
Three days had passed since the Warden had scratched Mr. Sir. Every time Mr. Sir
delivered water, he poured Stanley's straight onto the ground.
Fortunately, Mr. Pendanski delivered the water more often than Mr. Sir. Mr.
Pendanski was obviously aware of what Mr. Sir was doing, because he always gave
Stanley a little extra. He'd fill Stanley's canteen, then let Stanley take a long drink, then
top it off for him.
It helped, too, that Zero was digging some of Stanley's hole for him. Although, as
Stanley had expected, the other boys didn't like to see Stanley sitting around while they

52
were working. They'd say things like "Who died and made you king?" or "It must be
nice to have your own personal slave."
When he tried pointing out that he was the one who took the blame for the
sunflower seeds, the other boys said it was his fault because he was the one who spilled
them. "I risked my life for those seeds," Magnet had said, "and all I got was one lousy
handful."
Stanley had also tried to explain that he needed to save his energy so he could teach
Zero how to read, but the other boys just mocked him.
"Same old story, ain't it, Armpit?" X-Ray had said. "The white boy sits around
while the black boy does all the work. Ain't that right, Caveman?"
"No, that's not right," Stanley replied.
"No, it ain't," X-Ray agreed. "It ain't right at all."
Stanley dug out another shovelful of dirt. He knew X-Ray wouldn't have been
talking like that if he was the one teaching Zero to read. Then X-Ray would be talking
about how important it was that he got his rest, right? So he could be a better teacher,
right?
And that was true. He did need to save his strength so he could be a better teacher,
although Zero was a quick learner. Sometimes, in fact, Stanley hoped the Warden was
watching them, with her secret cameras and microphones, so she'd know that Zero
wasn't as stupid as everyone thought.
From across the lake he could see the approaching dust cloud. He took a drink from
his canteen, then waited to see who was driving the truck.
The swelling on Mr. Sir's face had gone down, but it was still a little puffy. There
had been three scratch marks down his cheek. Two of the marks had faded, but the
middle scratch must have been the deepest, because it still remained. It was a jagged
purple line running from below his eye to below his mouth, like a tattoo of a scar.
Stanley waited in line, then handed him his canteen.
Mr. Sir held it up to his ear and shook it. He smiled at the swishing sound.
Stanley hoped he wouldn't dump it out.
To his surprise, Mr. Sir held the canteen under the stream of water and filled it.
"Wait here," he said.
Still holding Stanley's canteen, Mr. Sir walked past him, then went around the side
of the truck and into the cab, where he couldn't be seen.
"What's he doing in there?" asked Zero.
"I wish I knew," said Stanley.
A short while later, Mr. Sir came out of the truck and handed Stanley his canteen. It
was still full.
"Thank you, Mr. Sir."
Mr. Sir smiled at him. "What are you waiting for?" he asked. "Drink up." He
popped some sunflower seeds into his mouth, chewed, and spit out the shells.
Stanley was afraid to drink it. He hated to think what land of vile substance Mr. Sir
might have put in it.

53
He brought the canteen back to his hole. For a long time, he left it beside his hole as
he continued to dig. Then, when he was so thirsty that he could hardly stand it anymore,
he unscrewed the cap, turned the canteen over, and poured it all out onto the dirt. He
was afraid that if he'd waited another second, he might have taken a drink.
After Stanley taught Zero the final six letters of the alphabet, he taught him to write
his name.
"Capital Z-e-r-o."
Zero wrote the letters as Stanley said them. "Zero," he said, looking at his piece of
paper. His smile was too big for his face.
Stanley watched him write it over and over again.
Zero Zero Zero Zero Zero Zero Zero . . .
In a way, it made him sad. He couldn't help but think that a hundred times zero was
still nothing.
"You know, that's not my real name," Zero said as they headed to the Wreck Room
for dinner.
"Well, yeah," Stanley said, "I guess I knew that." He had never really been sure.
"Everyone's always called me Zero, even before I came here."
"Oh. Okay."
"My real name is Hector."
"Hector," Stanley repeated.
"Hector Zeroni."

28
After twenty years, Kate Barlow returned to Green Lake. It was a place where
nobody would ever find her? a ghost town on a ghost lake.
The peach trees had all died, but there were a couple of small oak trees still growing
by an old abandoned cabin. The cabin used to be on the eastern shore of the lake. Now
the edge of the lake was over five miles away, and it was little more than a small pond
full of dirty water.
She lived in the cabin. Sometimes she could hear Sam's voice echoing across the
emptiness. "Onions! Sweet fresh onions."
She knew she was crazy. She knew she'd been crazy for the last twenty years.
"Oh, Sam," she would say, speaking into the vast emptiness. "I know it is hot, but I
feel so very cold. My hands are cold. My feet are cold. My face is cold. My heart is
cold."
And sometimes she would hear him say, "I can fix that," and she'd feel his warm
arm across her shoulders.
She'd been living in the cabin about three months when she was awakened one
morning by someone kicking open the cabin door. She opened her eyes to see the blurry
end of a rifle, two inches from her nose.
She could smell Trout Walker's dirty feet.

54
"You've got exactly ten seconds to tell me where you've hidden your loot," said
Trout. "Or else I'll blow your head off."
She yawned.
A redheaded woman was there with Trout. Kate could see her rummaging through
the cabin, dumping drawers and knocking things from the shelves of cabinets.
The woman came to her. "Where is it?" she demanded.
"Linda Miller?" asked Kate. "Is that you?"
Linda Miller had been in the fourth grade when Kate Barlow was still a teacher. She
had been a cute freckle-faced girl with beautiful red hair. Now her face was blotchy,
and her hair was dirty and scraggly.
"It's Linda Walker now," said Trout.
"Oh, Linda, I'm so sorry," said Kate.
Trout jabbed her throat with the rifle. "Where's the loot?"
"There is no loot," said Kate.
"Don't give me that!" shouted Trout. "You've robbed every bank from here to
Houston."
"You better tell him," said Linda. "We're desperate."
"You married him for his money, didn't you?" asked Kate.
Linda nodded. "But it's all gone. It dried up with the lake. The peach trees. The
livestock. I kept thinking: It has to rain soon. The drought can't last forever. But it just
kept getting hotter and hotter and hotter . . ." Her eyes fixed on the shovel, which was
leaning up against the fireplace. "She's buried it!" she declared.
"I don't know what you're talking about," said Kate.
There was a loud blast as Trout fired his rifle just above her head. The window
behind her shattered. "Where's it buried?" he demanded.
"Go ahead and kill me, Trout," said Kate. "But I sure hope you like to dig. 'Cause
you're going to be digging for a long time. It's a big vast wasteland out there. You, and
your children, and their children, can dig for the next hundred years and you'll never
find it."
Linda grabbed Kate's hair and jerked her head back. "Oh, we're not going to kill
you," she said. "But by the time we're finished with you, you're going to wish you were
dead."
"I've been wishing I was dead for the last twenty years," said Kate.
They dragged her out of bed and pushed her outside. She wore blue silk pajamas.
Her turquoise-studded black boots remained beside her bed.
They loosely tied her legs together so she could walk, but she couldn't run. They
made her walk barefoot on the hot ground.
They wouldn't let her stop walking.
"Not until you take us to the loot," said Trout.
Linda hit Kate on the back of her legs with the shovel. "You're going to take us to it
sooner or later. So you might as well make it sooner."
She walked one way, then the other, until her feet were black and blistered.
Whenever she stopped, Linda whacked her with the shovel.
"I'm losing my patience," warned Trout.

55

She felt the shovel jab into her back, and she fell onto hard dirt.
"Get up!" ordered Linda.
Kate struggled to her feet.
"We're being easy on you today," said Trout. "It's just going to keep getting worse
and worse for you until you take us to it."
"Look out!" shouted Linda.
A lizard leaped toward them. Kate could see its big red eyes.
Linda tried to hit it with the shovel, and Trout shot at it, but they both missed.
The lizard landed on Kate's bare ankle. Its sharp black teeth bit into her leg. Its
white tongue lapped up the droplets of blood that leaked out of the wound.
Kate smiled. There was nothing they could do to her anymore. "Start digging," she
said.
"Where is it?" Linda screeched.
"Where'd you bury it?" Trout demanded.
Kate Barlow died laughing.

PART TWO
THE LAST HOLE

29
There was a change in the weather.
For the worse.
The air became unbearably humid. Stanley was drenched in sweat. Beads of
moisture ran down the handle of his shovel. It was almost as if the temperature had
gotten so hot that the air itself was sweating.
A loud boom of thunder echoed across the empty lake.
A storm was way off to the west, beyond the mountains. Stanley could count more
than thirty seconds between the flash of lightning and the clap of thunder. That was how
far away the storm was. Sound travels a great distance across a barren wasteland.
Usually, Stanley couldn't see the mountains at this time of day. The only time they
were visible was just at sunup, before the air became hazy. Now, however, the sky was
very dark off to the west, and every time the lightning flashed, the dark shape of the
mountains would briefly appear.
"C'mon, rain!" shouted Armpit. "Blow this way!"
"Maybe it'll rain so hard it will fill up the whole lake," said Squid. "We can go
swimming."
"Forty days and forty nights," said X-Ray. "Guess we better start building us an ark.
Get two of each animal, right?"
"Right," said Zigzag. "Two rattlesnakes. Two scorpions. Two yellow-spotted
lizards."

56
The humidity, or maybe the electricity in the air, had made Zigzag's head even more
wild-looking. His frizzy blond hair stuck almost straight out.
The horizon lit up with a huge web of lightning. In that split second Stanley thought
he saw an unusual rock formation on top of one of the mountain peaks. The peak looked
to him exactly like a giant fist, with the thumb sticking straight up.
Then it was gone.
And Stanley wasn't sure whether he'd seen it or not.
"I found refuge on God's thumb."
That was what his great-grandfather had supposedly said after Kate Barlow had
robbed him and left him stranded in the desert.
No one ever knew what he meant by that. He was delirious when he said it.
"But how could he live for three weeks without food or water?" Stanley had asked
his father.
"I don't know. I wasn't there," replied his father. "I wasn't born yet. My father wasn't
born yet. My grandmother, your great-grandmother, was a nurse in the hospital where
they treated him. He'd always talked about how she'd dab his forehead with a cool wet
cloth. He said that's why he fell in love with her. He thought she was an angel."
"A real angel?"
His father didn't know.
"What about after he got better? Did he ever say what he meant by God's thumb, or
how he survived?"
"No. He just blamed his no-good-pig-stealing-father."
The storm moved off farther west, along with any hope of rain. But the image of the
fist and thumb remained in Stanley's head. Although, instead of lightning flashing
behind the thumb, in Stanley's mind, the lightning was coming out of the thumb, as if it
were the thumb of God.

30
The next day was Zigzag's birthday. Or so he said. Zigzag lay in his cot as everyone
headed outside. "I get to sleep in, because it's my birthday."
Then a little while later he cut into the breakfast line, just in front of Squid. Squid
told him to go to the end of the line. "Hey, it's my birthday," Zigzag said, staying where
he was.
"It's not your birthday," said Magnet, who was standing behind Squid.
"Is too," said Zigzag. "July 8."
Stanley was behind Magnet. He didn't know what day of the week it was, let alone
the date. It could have been July 8, but how would Zigzag know?
He tried to figure out how long he'd been at Camp Green Lake, if indeed it was July
8. "I came here on May 24," he said aloud. "So that means I've been here . . ."
"Forty-six days," said Zero.

57
Stanley was still trying to remember how many days there were in May and June.
He looked at Zero. He'd learned not to doubt him when it came to math.
Forty-six days. It felt more like a thousand. He didn't dig a hole that first day, and he
hadn't dug one yet today. That meant he'd dug forty-four holes? if it really was July 8.
"Can I have an extra carton of juice?" Zigzag asked Mr. Sir. "It's my birthday."
To everyone's surprise, Mr. Sir gave it to him.
Stanley dug his shovel into the dirt. Hole number 45. "The forty-fifth hole is the
hardest," he said to himself.
But that really wasn't true, and he knew it. He was a lot stronger than when he first
arrived. His body had adjusted somewhat to the heat and harsh conditions.
Mr. Sir was no longer depriving him of water. After having to get by on less water
for a week or so, Stanley now felt like he had all the water he could want.
Of course it helped that Zero dug some of his hole for him each day, but that wasn't
as great as everyone thought it was. He always felt awkward while Zero was digging his
hole, unsure of what to do with himself. Usually he stood around awhile, before sitting
off by himself on the hard ground, with the sun beating down on him.
It was better than digging.
But not a lot better.
When the sun came up a couple of hours later, Stanley looked for "the thumb of
God." The mountains were little more than dark shadows on the horizon.
He thought he could make out a spot where the top of one mountain seemed to jut
upward, but it didn't seem very impressive. A short time later the mountains were no
longer visible, hidden behind the glare of the sun, reflecting off the dirty air.
It was possible, he realized, that he was somewhere near where Kate Barlow had
robbed his great-grandfather. If that was really her lipstick tube he'd found, then she
must have lived somewhere around here.
Zero took his turn before the lunch break. Stanley climbed out of his hole, and Zero
climbed down into it.
"Hey, Caveman," said Zigzag. "You should get a whip. Then if your slave doesn't
dig fast enough, you can crack it across his back."
"He's not my slave," said Stanley. "We have a deal, that's all."
"A good deal for you," said Zigzag.
"It was Zero's idea, not mine."
"Don't you know, Zig?" said X-Ray, coming over. "Caveman's doing Zero a big
favor. Zero likes to dig holes."
"He sure is a nice guy to let Zero dig his hole for him," said Squid.
"Well, what about me?" asked Armpit. "I like to dig holes, too. Can I dig for you,
Caveman, after Zero's finished?"
The other boys laughed.
"No, I want to," said Zigzag. "It's my birthday."
Stanley tried his best to ignore them.
Zigzag kept at it. "Come on, Caveman. Be a pal. Let me dig your hole."

58

Stanley smiled, as if it were all a big joke.
When Mr. Pendanski arrived with water" and lunch, Zigzag offered Stanley his
place in line. "Since you're so much better than me."
Stanley remained where he was. "I didn't say I was bet? "
"You're insulting him, Zig," said X-Ray. "Why should Caveman take your place,
when he deserves to be at the very front? He's better than all of us. Aren't you,
Caveman?"
"No," said Stanley.
"Sure you are," said X-Ray. "Now come to the front of the line where you belong."
"That's okay," said Stanley.
"No, it's not okay," said X-Ray. "Get up here."
Stanley hesitated, then moved to the front of the line.
"Well, this is a first," Mr. Pendanski said, coming around the side of the truck. He
filled Stanley's canteen and handed him a sack lunch.
Stanley was glad to get away. He sat down between his hole and Zero's. He was
glad that he'd be digging his own hole for the rest of the day. Maybe the other boys
would leave him alone. Maybe he shouldn't let Zero dig his hole for him anymore. But
he needed to save his energy to be a good teacher.
He bit into his sandwich, which contained some kind of meat-and-cheese mixture
that came in a can. Just about everything at Green Lake came in a can. The supply truck
came once a month.
He glanced up to see Zigzag and Squid walking toward him.
"I'll give you my cookie if you let me dig your hole," said Zigzag.
Squid laughed.
"Here, take my cookie," said Zigzag, holding it out for him.
"No, thanks," said Stanley.
"C'mon, take my cookie," said Zigzag, sticking it in his face.
"Leave me alone," said Stanley.
"Please eat my cookie," said Zigzag, holding it under Stanley's nose.
Squid laughed.
Stanley pushed it away.
Zigzag pushed him back. "Don't push me!"
"I didn't . . ." Stanley got to his feet. He looked around. Mr. Pendanski was filling
Zero's canteen.
Zigzag pushed him again. "I said, 'Don't push me.'"
Stanley took a step backward, carefully avoiding Zero's hole.
Zigzag kept after him. He shoved Stanley and said, "Quit pushing!"
"Lay off," said Armpit, as he, Magnet, and X-Ray joined them.
"Why should he?" snapped X-Ray. "Caveman's bigger. He can take care of
himself."
"I don't want any trouble," Stanley said.
Zigzag pushed him hard. "Eat my cookie," he said.
Stanley was glad to see Mr. Pendanski coming toward them, along with Zero.
"Hi, Mom," said Armpit. "We were just fooling around."

59
"I saw what was going on," Mr. Pendanski said. He turned to Stanley. "Go ahead,
Stanley," he said. "Hit him back. You're bigger."
Stanley stared at Mr. Pendanski in astonishment.
"Teach the bully a lesson," said Mr. Pendanski.
Zigzag hit Stanley on the shoulder with his open hand. "Teach me a lesson," he
challenged.
Stanley made a feeble attempt to punch Zigzag, then he felt a flurry of fists against
his head and neck. Zigzag had hold of his collar with one hand and was hitting him with
the other.
The collar ripped and Stanley fell backward onto the dirt.
"That's enough!" Mr. Pendanski yelled.
It wasn't enough for Zigzag. He jumped on top of Stanley.
"Stop!" shouted Mr. Pendanski.
The side of Stanley's face was pressed flat against the dirt. He tried to protect
himself, but Zigzag's fists slammed off his arms and pounded his face into the ground.
All he could do was wait for it to be over.
Then, suddenly, Zigzag was off of him. Stanley managed to look up, and he saw
that Zero had his arm around Zigzag's long neck.
Zigzag made a gagging sound, as he desperately tried to pry Zero's arm off of him.
"You're going to kill him!" shouted Mr. Pendanski.
Zero kept squeezing.
Armpit charged into them, freeing Zigzag from Zero's choke hold. The three boys
fell to the ground in different directions.
Mr. Pendanski fired his pistol into the air.
The other counselors came running from the office, the tents, or out on the lake.
They had their guns drawn, but holstered them when they saw the trouble was over.
The Warden walked over from her cabin.
"There was a riot," Mr. Pendanski told her. "Zero almost strangled Ricky."
The Warden looked at Zigzag, who was still stretching and massaging his neck.
Then she turned her attention to Stanley, who was obviously in the worst condition.
"What happened to you?"
"Nothing. It wasn't a riot."
"Ziggy was beating up the Caveman," said Armpit. "Then Zero started choking
Zigzag, and I had to pull Zero off of Zigzag. It was all over before Mom fired his gun."
"They just got a little hot, that's all," said X-Ray. "You know how it is. In the sun all
day. People get hot, right? But everything's cool now."
"I see," the Warden said. She turned to Zigzag. "What's the matter? Didn't you get a
puppy for your birthday?"
"Zig's just a little hot," said X-Ray. "Out in the sun all day. You know how it is. The
blood starts to boil."
"Is that what happened, Zigzag?" asked the Warden.
"Yeah," said Zigzag. "Like X-Ray said. Working so hard in the hot sun, while
Caveman just sits around doing nothing. My blood boiled."

60
"Excuse me?" said the Warden. "Caveman digs his holes, just like everyone else."
Zigzag shrugged. "Sometimes."
"Excuse me?"
"Zero's been digging part of Caveman's hole every day," said Squid.
The Warden looked from Squid to Stanley to Zero.
"I'm teaching him to read and write," said Stanley. "It's sort of a trade. The hole still
gets dug, so what does it matter who digs it?"
"Excuse me?" said the Warden.
"Isn't it more important for him to learn to read?" Stanley asked. "Doesn't that build
character more than digging holes?"
"That's his character," said the Warden. "What about your character?"
Stanley raised and lowered one shoulder.
The Warden turned to Zero. "Well, Zero, what have you learned so far?"
Zero said nothing.
"Have you just been digging Caveman's hole for nothing?" the Warden asked him.
"He likes to dig holes," said Mr. Pendanski.
"Tell me what you learned yesterday," said the Warden. "Surely you can remember
that."
Zero said nothing.
Mr. Pendanski laughed. He picked up a shovel and said, "You might as well try to
teach this shovel to read! It's got more brains than Zero."
"The 'at' sound," said Zero.
"The 'at' sound," repeated the Warden. "Well then, tell me, what does c-a-t spell?"
Zero glanced around uneasily.
Stanley knew he knew the answer. Zero just didn't like answering questions.
"Cat," Zero said.
Mr. Pendanski clapped his hands. "Bravo! Bravo! The boy's a genius!"
"F-a-t?" asked the Warden.
Zero thought a moment.
Stanley hadn't taught him the "f" sound yet.
"Eff," Zero whispered. "Eff-at. Fat."
"How about h-a-t?" asked the Warden.
Stanley hadn't taught him the "h" sound either.
Zero concentrated hard, then said, "Chat."
All the counselors laughed.
"He's a genius, all right!" said Mr. Pendanski. "He's so stupid, he doesn't even know
he's stupid."
Stanley didn't know why Mr. Pendanski seemed to have it in for Zero. If Mr.
Pendanski only thought about it, he'd realize it was very logical for Zero to think that
the letter "h" made the "ch" sound.
"Okay, from now on, I don't want anyone digging anyone else's hole," said the
Warden. "And no more reading lessons."
"I'm not digging another hole," said Zero.

61
"Good," said the Warden. She turned to Stanley. "You know why you're digging
holes? Because it's good for you. It teaches you a lesson. If Zero digs your hole for you,
then you're not learning your lesson, are you?"
"I guess not," Stanley mumbled, although he knew they weren't digging just to learn
a lesson. She was looking for something, something that belonged to Kissin' Kate
Barlow.
"Why can't I dig my own hole, but still teach Zero to read?" he asked. "What's
wrong with that?"
"I'll tell you what's wrong with that," the Warden said. "It leads to trouble. Zero
almost killed Zigzag."
"It causes him stress," said Mr. Pendanski. "I know you mean well, Stanley, but face
it. Zero's too stupid to learn to read. That's what makes his blood boil. Not the hot sun."
"I'm not digging another hole," said Zero.
Mr. Pendanski handed him the shovel. "Here, take it, Zero. It's all you'll ever be
good for."
Zero took the shovel.
Then he swung it like a baseball bat.
The metal blade smashed across Mr. Pendanski's face. His knees crumpled beneath
him. He was unconscious before he hit the ground.
The counselors all drew their guns.
Zero held the shovel out in front of him, as if he were going to try to bat away the
bullets. "I hate digging holes," he said. Then he slowly backed away.
"Don't shoot him," said the Warden. "He can't go anywhere. The last thing we need
is an investigation."
Zero kept backing up, out past the cluster of holes the boys had been digging, then
farther and farther out onto the lake.
"He's going to have to come back for water," the Warden said.
Stanley noticed Zero's canteen lying on the ground near his hole.
A couple of the counselors helped Mr. Pendanski to his feet and into the truck.
Stanley looked out toward Zero, but he had disappeared into the haze.
The Warden ordered the counselors to take turns guarding the shower room and
Wreck Room, all day and all night. They were not to let Zero drink any water. When he
returned, he was to be brought directly to her.
She examined her fingernails and said, "It's almost time for me to paint my nails
again."
Before she left, she told the six remaining members of Group D that she still
expected seven holes.

31
Stanley angrily dug his shovel into the dirt. He was angry at everyone? Mr.
Pendanski, the Warden, Zigzag, X-Ray, and his

62
no-good-dirty-rotten-pig-stealing-great-great-grandfather. But mostly he was angry at
himself.
He knew he never should have let Zero dig part of his hole for him. He still could
have taught him to read. If Zero could dig all day and still have the strength to learn,
then he should have been able to dig all day and still have the strength to teach.
What he should do, he thought, was go out after Zero.
But he didn't.
None of the others helped him dig Zero's hole, and he didn't expect them to. Zero
had been helping him dig his hole. Now he had to dig Zero's.
He remained out on the lake, digging during the hottest part of the day, long after
everyone else had gone in. He kept an eye out for Zero, but Zero didn't come back.
It would have been easy to go out after Zero. There was nobody to stop him. He
kept thinking that's what he should do.
Maybe they could climb to the top of Big Thumb.
If it wasn't too far away. And if it was really the same place where his
great-grandfather found refuge. And if, after a hundred years or so, water was still
there.
It didn't seem likely. Not when an entire lake had gone dry.
And even if they did find refuge on Big Thumb, he thought, they'd still have to
come back here, eventually. Then they'd both have to face the Warden, and her
rattlesnake fingers.
Instead, he came up with a better idea, although he didn't have it quite all figured out
yet. He thought that maybe he could make a deal with the Warden. He'd tell her where
he really found the gold tube if she wouldn't scratch Zero.
He wasn't sure how he'd make this deal without getting himself in deeper trouble.
She might just say, Tell me where you found it or I'll scratch you, too. Plus, it would
mean X-Ray would get in trouble, too. She'd probably scratch him up as well.
X-Ray would be out to get him for the next sixteen months.
He dug his shovel into the dirt.
By the next morning, Zero still hadn't returned. Stanley saw one of the counselors
sitting guard by the water spigot outside the shower wall.
Mr. Pendanski had two black eyes and a bandage over his nose. "I always knew he
was stupid," Stanley heard him say.
Stanley was required to dig only one hole the next day. As he dug, he kept a
constant watchout for Zero, but never saw him. Once again he considered going out on
the lake to look for him, but he began to realize that it was already too late.
His only hope was that Zero had found God's thumb on his own. It wasn't
impossible. His great-grandfather had found it. For some reason his great-grandfather
had felt the urge to climb to the top of that mountain. Maybe Zero would feel the same
urge.
If it was the same mountain. If water was still there.

63
He tried to convince himself it wasn't impossible. There had been a storm just a few
days ago. Maybe Big Thumb was actually some kind of natural water tower that caught
and stored the rain.
It wasn't impossible.
He returned to his tent to find the Warden, Mr. Sir, and Mr. Pendanski all waiting
for him.
"Have you seen Zero?" the Warden asked him.
"No."
"No sign of him at all?"
"No."
"Do you have any idea where he went?"
"No."
"You know you're not doing him any favors if you're lying," said Mr. Sir. "He can't
survive out there for more than a day or two."
"I don't know where he is."
All three stared at Stanley as if they were trying to figure out if he was telling the
truth. Mr. Pendanski's face was so swollen, he could barely open his eyes. They were
just slits.
"You sure he has no family?" the Warden asked Mr. Pendanski.
"He's a ward of the state," Mr. Pendanski told her. "He was living on the streets
when he was arrested."
"Is there anyone who might ask questions? Some social worker who took an interest
in him?"
"He had nobody," said Mr. Pendanski. "He was nobody."
The Warden thought a moment. "Okay, I want you to destroy all of his records."
Mr. Pendanski nodded.
"He was never here," said the Warden.
Mr. Sir nodded.
"Can you get into the state files from our computer?" she asked Mr. Pendanski. "I
don't want anyone in the A.G.'s office to know he was here."
"I don't think I can erase him completely from all the state files," said Mr. Pendanski.
"Too many cross-references. But I can make it so it would be very difficult for anyone
to ever find a record of him. Like I said, though, no one will ever look. No one cares
about Hector Zeroni."
"Good," said the Warden.

32
Two days later a new kid was assigned to Group D. His name was Brian, but X-Ray
called him Twitch because he was always fidgeting. Twitch was assigned Zero's bed,
and Zero's crate.
Vacancies don't last long at Camp Green Lake.

64
Twitch had been arrested for stealing a car. He claimed he could break into a car,
disconnect the alarm, and hot-wire the engine, all in less than a minute.
"I never plan to, you know, steal one," he told them. "But sometimes, you know, I'll
be walking past a real nice car, parked in a deserted area, and, you know, I'll just start
twitching. If you think I twitch now, you should see me when I'm around a car. The next
thing I know, I'm behind the wheel."
Stanley lay on his scratchy sheets. It occurred to him that his cot no longer smelled
bad. He wondered if the smell had gone away, or if he had just gotten used to it.
"Hey, Caveman," said Twitch. "Do we really have to get up at 4:30?"
"You get used to it," Stanley told him. "It's the coolest part of the day."
He tried not to think about Zero. It was too late. Either he'd made it to Big Thumb,
or . . .
What worried him the most, however, wasn't that it was too late. What worried him
the most, what really ate at his insides, was the fear that it wasn't too late.
What if Zero was still alive, desperately crawling across the dirt searching for
water?
He tried to force the image out of his mind.
The next morning, out on the lake, Stanley listened as Mr. Sir told Twitch the
requirements for his hole: ". . . as wide and as deep as your shovel."
Twitch fidgeted. His fingers drummed against the wooden shaft of his shovel, and
his neck moved from side to side.
"You won't be twitching so much after digging all day," Mr. Sir told him. "You
won't have the strength to wiggle your pinkie." He popped some sunflower seeds in his
mouth, deftly chewed them, and spat out the shells. "This isn't a Girl Scout camp."
The water truck came shortly after sunrise. Stanley got in line behind Magnet,
ahead of Twitch.
What if it's not too late?
He watched Mr. Sir fill X-Ray's canteen. The image of Zero crawling across the hot
dry dirt remained in his head.
But what could he do about it? Even if Zero was somehow alive after more than
four days, how would Stanley ever find him? It would take days. He'd need a car.
Or a pickup truck. A pickup truck with a tank of water in the back.
Stanley wondered if Mr. Sir had left the keys in the ignition.
He slowly backed away from the line, then circled over to the side of the truck. He
looked through the window. The keys were there, dangling in the ignition.
Stanley felt his fingers start to twitch.
He took a deep breath to steady himself and tried to think clearly. He had never
driven before.
But how hard could it be?
This is really crazy, he told himself. Whatever he did, he knew he'd have to do it
quickly, before Mr. Sir noticed.
It's too late, he told himself. Zero couldn't have survived.
But what if it wasn't too late?

65
He took another deep breath. Think about this, he told himself, but there wasn't time
to think. He flung open the door to the truck and climbed quickly inside.
"Hey!" shouted Mr. Sir.
He turned the key and stepped on the gas pedal. The engine revved.
The truck didn't move.
He pressed the pedal to the floor. The engine roared, but the truck was motionless.
Mr. Sir came running around the side of the truck. The door was still open.
"Put it in gear!" shouted Twitch.
The gear shift was on the floor next to the seat. Stanley pulled the lever back until
the arrow pointed to the letter D, for Drive.
The truck lurched forward. Stanley jerked back against the seat and tightly gripped
the wheel as the truck accelerated. His foot was pressed to the floor.
The truck went faster and faster across the dry lake bed. It bounced over a pile of
dirt. Suddenly Stanley was slammed forward, then instantly backward as an airbag
exploded in his face. He fell out of the open door and onto the ground.
He had driven straight into a hole.
He lay on the dirt staring at the truck, which stuck lopsided into the ground. He
sighed. He couldn't blame his
no-good-dirty-rotten-pig-stealing-great-great-grandfather this time. This time it was his
own fault, one hundred percent. He had probably just done the stupidest thing he had
ever done in his short and miserable life.
He managed to get to his feet. He was sore but didn't think he had broken any bones.
He glanced back at Mr. Sir, who remained where he was, staring at Stanley.
He ran. His canteen was strapped around his neck. It banged against his chest as he
ran, and every time it hit against him, it reminded him that it was empty, empty, empty.

33
He slowed to a walk. As far as he could tell, nobody was chasing him. He could hear
voices coming from back by the truck but couldn't make out the words. Occasionally
he'd hear the revving of the engine, but the truck wasn't going anywhere anytime soon.
He headed in what he thought was the direction of Big Thumb. He couldn't see it
through the haze.
Walking helped calm him down and allowed him to think clearly. He doubted he
could make it to Big Thumb, and with no water in his canteen, he didn't want to risk his
life on the hope that he'd find refuge there. He'd have to return to camp. He knew that.
But he was in no hurry. It would be better to return later, after everyone had a chance to
calm down. And as long as he'd come this far, he might as well look for Zero.
He decided he would walk as long as he could, until he was too weak to go any
farther, then he'd turn around and go back.
He smiled as he realized that wouldn't quite work. He would only go
halfway? halfway as far as he thought he could go, so that he'd still have the strength to

66
return. Then he'd have to make a deal with the Warden, tell her where he found Kate
Barlow's lipstick tube, and beg for mercy.
He was surprised by how far out the holes extended. He couldn't even see the camp
compound anymore, but he still kept passing holes. Just when he thought he'd passed
the last hole, he'd come across another cluster of them, a little farther away.
Back at the compound, they had dug in a systematic order, row upon row, allowing
space for the water truck. But out here there was no system. It was as if every once in a
while, in a fit of frustration, the Warden would just pick a spot at random, and say,
"What the hell, dig here." It was like trying to guess the winning numbers in a lottery.
Stanley found himself looking down into each hole he passed. He didn't admit to
himself what he was looking for.
After more than an hour had gone by, he thought he had surely seen the last hole,
but then off to the left he saw another cluster of them. He didn't actually see the holes.
He saw the mounds of dirt that surrounded them.
He stepped over the mounds and looked into the first hole. His heart stopped.
Down at the bottom was a family of yellow-spotted lizards. Their large red eyes
looked up at him.
He leapt back over the mound and ran.
He didn't know if they were chasing after him. He thought he might have seen one
leap out of the hole.
He ran until he couldn't run any farther, then collapsed. They hadn't come after him.
He sat there awhile and caught his breath. As he got back to his feet, he thought he
noticed something on the ground, maybe fifty yards away. It didn't look like much,
maybe just a big rock, but in a land of nothingness, any little thing seemed unusual.
He walked slowly toward it. The encounter with the lizards had made him very
cautious.
It turned out to be an empty sack of sunflower seeds. He wondered if it was the
same one Magnet had stolen from Mr. Sir, although that didn't seem likely.
He turned it inside out and found one seed stuck to the burlap.
Lunch.

34
The sun was almost directly overhead. He figured he could walk for no more than
another hour, maybe two, before he had to turn back.
It seemed pointless. He could see there was nothing ahead of him. Nothing but
emptiness. He was hot, tired, hungry, and, most of all, thirsty. Maybe he should just
turn around now. Maybe he'd already gone halfway and didn't know it.
Then, looking around, he saw a pool of water less than a hundred yards away from
where he was standing. He closed his eyes and opened them to make sure he wasn't
imagining it. The pool was still there.
He hurried toward it. The pool hurried away from him, moving as he moved,
stopping when he stopped.

67
There wasn't any water. It was a mirage caused by the shimmering waves of heat
rising off the dry ground.
He kept walking. He still carried the empty sack of sunflower seeds. He didn't know
if he might find something to put in it.
After a while he thought he could make out the shape of the mountains through the
haze. At first he wasn't sure if this was another kind of mirage, but the farther he walked,
the clearer they came into a view. Almost straight ahead of him, he could see what
looked like a fist, with its thumb sticking up.
He didn't know how far away it was. Five miles? Fifty miles? One thing was certain.
It was more than halfway.
He kept walking toward it, although he didn't know why. He knew he'd have to turn
around before he got there. But every time he looked at it, it seemed to encourage him,
giving him the thumbs-up sign.
As he continued walking, he became aware of a large object on the lake. He couldn't
tell what it was, or even if it was natural or man-made. It looked a little like a fallen tree,
although it didn't seem likely that a tree would grow here. More likely, it was a ridge of
dirt or rocks.
The object, whatever it was, was not on the way to Big Thumb but off to the right.
He tried to decide whether to go to it or continue toward Big Thumb. Or maybe just turn
around.
There was no point in heading toward Big Thumb, he decided. He would never
make it. For all he knew it was like chasing the moon. But he could make it to the
mysterious object.
He changed directions. He doubted it was anything, but the fact that there was
something in the middle of all this nothing made it hard for him to pass up. He decided
to make the object his halfway point, and he hoped he hadn't already gone too far.
He laughed to himself when he saw what it was. It was a boat? or part of a boat
anyway. It struck him as funny to see a boat in the middle of this dry and barren
wasteland. But after all, he realized, this was once a lake.
The boat lay upside down, half buried in the dirt.
Someone may have drowned here, he thought grimly? at the same spot where he
could very well die of thirst.
The name of the boat had been painted on the back. The upside-down red letters
were peeled and faded, but Stanley could still read the name: Mary Lou.
On one side of the boat there was a pile of dirt and then a tunnel leading down below
the boat. The tunnel looked big enough for a good-sized animal to crawl through.
He heard a noise. Something stirred under the boat.
It was coming out.
"Hey!" Stanley shouted, hoping to scare it back inside. His mouth was very dry, and
it was hard to shout very loudly.
"Hey," the thing answered weakly.
Then a dark hand and an orange sleeve reached up out of the tunnel.

68

35
Zero's face looked like a jack-o'-lantern that had been left out too many days past
Halloween? half rotten, with sunken eyes and a drooping smile. "Is that water?" he
asked. His voice was weak and raspy. His lips were so pale they were almost white, and
his tongue seemed to flop around uselessly in his mouth as he spoke, as if it kept getting
in the way.
"It's empty," said Stanley. He stared at Zero, not quite believing that he was real. "I
tried to bring you the whole water truck, but," he smiled sheepishly, "I drove it into a
hole. I can't believe you're . . ."
"Me neither," said Zero.
"C'mon, we got to get back to camp."
Zero shook his head. "I'm not going back."
"You have to. We both have to."
"You want some sploosh?" Zero asked.
"What?"
Zero shaded his eyes with his forearm. "It's cooler under the boat," he said.
Stanley watched Zero crawl back through his hole. It was a miracle he was still
alive, but Stanley knew he would have to get him back to camp soon, even if he had to
carry him.
He crawled after him, and was just able to squeeze his body through the hole. He
never would have fit when he first came to Camp Green Lake. He'd lost a lot of weight.
As he pulled himself through, his leg struck something sharp and hard. It was a
shovel. For a second Stanley wondered how it got there, but then remembered that Zero
had taken it with him after striking Mr. Pendanski.
It was cooler under the boat, which was half buried in the dirt. There were enough
cracks and holes in the bottom of the boat, now the roof, to provide light and ventilation.
He could see empty jars scattered about.
Zero held a jar in his hand and grunted as he tried to unscrew the lid.
"What is it?"
"Sploosh!" His voice was strained as he worked on the jar. "That's what I call it.
They were buried under the boat."
He still couldn't get the lid off. "I found sixteen jars. Here, hand me the shovel."
Stanley didn't have a lot of room to move. He reached behind him, grabbed the
wooden end of the shovel, and held it out to Zero, blade first.
"Sometimes you just have to . . ." Zero said, then he hit the jar against the blade of
the shovel, breaking the top of the jar clean off. He quickly brought the jar to his mouth
and licked the sploosh off the jagged edges before it spilled.
"Careful," Stanley warned.
Zero picked up the cracked lid and licked the sploosh off that as well. Then he
handed the broken jar to Stanley. "Drink some."

69
Stanley held it in his hand and stared at it a moment. He was afraid of the broken
glass. He was also afraid of the sploosh. It looked like mud. Whatever it was, he
realized, it must have been in the boat when the boat sank. That meant it was probably
over a hundred years old. Who knew what kind of bacteria might be living in it?
"It's good," said Zero, encouraging him.
He wondered if Zero had heard of bacteria. He raised the jar to his mouth and
carefully took a sip.
It was a warm, bubbly, mushy nectar, sweet and tangy. It felt like heaven as it
flowed over his dry mouth and down his parched throat. He thought it might have been
some kind of fruit at some time, perhaps peaches.
Zero smiled at him. "I told you it was good."
Stanley didn't want to drink too much, but it was too good to resist. They passed the
jar back and forth until it was empty. "How many are left?" he asked.
"None," said Zero.
Stanley's mouth dropped. "Now I have to take you back," he said.
"I'm not digging any more holes," said Zero.
"They won't make you dig," Stanley promised. "They'll probably send you to a
hospital, like Barf Bag."
"Barf Bag stepped on a rattlesnake," said Zero.
Stanley remembered how he'd almost done the same. "I guess he didn't hear the
rattle."
"He did it on purpose," said Zero.
"You think?"
"He took off his shoe and sock first."
Stanley shivered as he tried to imagine it.
"What's Mar-ya Luh-oh-oo?" asked Zero.
"What?"
Zero concentrated hard. "Mar ya, Luh oh oo."
"I have no idea."
"I'll show you," said Zero. He crawled hack out from under the boat.
Stanley followed. Back outside, he had to shield his eyes from the brightness.
Zero walked around to the back of the boat and pointed to the upside-down letters.
"Mm-ar-yuh. Luh-oh-oo."
Stanley smiled. "Mary Lou. It's the name of the boat."
"Mary Lou," Zero repeated, studying the letters. "I thought 'y' made the 'yuh'
sound."
"It does," said Stanley. "But not when it's at the end of a word. Sometimes 'y' is a
vowel and sometimes it's a consonant."
Zero suddenly groaned. He grabbed his stomach and bent over.
"Are you all right?"
Zero dropped to the ground. He lay on his side, with his knees pulled up to his chest.
He continued to groan.

70
Stanley watched helplessly. He wondered if it was the sploosh. He looked back
toward Camp Green Lake. At least he thought it was the direction of Camp Green Lake.
He wasn't entirely sure.
Zero stopped moaning, and his body slowly unbent.
"I'm taking you back," said Stanley.
Zero managed to sit up. He took several deep breaths.
"Look, I got a plan so you won't get in trouble," Stanley assured him. "Remember
when I found the gold tube. Remember, I gave it to X-Ray, and the Warden went crazy
making us dig where she thought X-Ray found it. I think if I tell the Warden where I
really found it, I think she'll let us off."
"I'm not going back," said Zero.
"You've got nowhere else to go," said Stanley.
Zero said nothing.
"You'll die out here," said Stanley.
"Then I'll die out here."
Stanley didn't know what to do. He had come to rescue Zero and instead drank the
last of his sploosh. He looked off into the distance. "I want you to look at something."
"I'm not? "
"I just want you to look at that mountain up there. See the one that has something
sticking up out of it?"
"Yeah, I think."
"What does it look like to you? Does it look like anything?"
Zero said nothing.
But as he studied the mountain, his right hand slowly formed into a fist. He raised
his thumb. His eyes went from the mountain, to his hand, then back to the mountain.