They put four of the unbroken jars in the burlap sack, in case they might be able to
use them. Stanley carried the sack. Zero held the shovel.
"I should warn you," Stanley said. "I'm not exactly the luckiest guy in the world."
Zero wasn't worried. "When you spend your whole life living in a hole," he said,
"the only way you can go is up."
They gave each other the thumbs-up sign, then headed out.
It was the hottest part of the day. Stanley's empty-empty-empty canteen was still
strapped around his neck. He thought back to the water truck, and wished he'd at least
stopped and filled his canteen before running off.
They hadn't gone very far before Zero had another attack. He clutched his stomach
as he let himself fall to the ground.
Stanley could only wait for it to pass. The sploosh had saved Zero's life, but it was
now destroying him from the inside. He wondered how long it would be before he, too,
felt the effects.

71
He looked at Big Thumb. It didn't seem any closer than when they first started out.
Zero took a deep breath and managed to sit up.
"Can you walk?" Stanley asked him.
"Just give me a second," Zero said. He took another breath, then, using the shovel,
pulled himself back to his feet. He gave Stanley the thumbs-up sign and they continued.
Sometimes Stanley would try to go for a long while without looking at Big Thumb.
He'd make a mental snapshot of how it looked, then wait maybe ten minutes before
looking at it again, to see if it seemed closer.
It never did. It was like chasing the moon.
And if they ever reached it, he realized, then they'd still have to climb it.
"I wonder who she was," said Zero.
"Who?"
"Mary Lou," said Zero.
Stanley smiled. "I guess she was once a real person on a real lake. It's hard to
imagine."
"I bet she was pretty," said Zero. "Somebody must have loved her a lot, to name a
boat after her."
"Yeah," said Stanley. "I bet she looked great in a bathing suit, sitting in the boat
while her boyfriend rowed."
Zero used the shovel as a third leg. Two legs weren't enough to keep him up. "I got
to stop and rest," he said after a while.
Stanley looked at Big Thumb. It still didn't look any closer. He was afraid if Zero
stopped, he might never get started again. "We're almost there," he said.
He wondered which was closer: Camp Green Lake or Big Thumb?
"I really have to sit down."
"Just see if you can go a little? "
Zero collapsed. The shovel stayed up a fraction of a second longer, perfectly
balanced on the tip of the blade, then it fell next to him.
Zero knelt, bent over with his head on the ground. Stanley could hear a very low
moaning sound coming from him. He looked at the shovel and couldn't help but think
that he might need it to dig a grave. Zero's last hole.
And who will dig a grave for me? he thought.
But Zero did get up, once again flashing thumbs-up.
"Give me some words," he said weakly.
It took Stanley a few seconds to realize what he meant. Then he smiled and said,
"R-u-n."
Zero sounded it out to himself. "Rr-un, run. Run."
"Good. F-u-n."
"Fffun."
The spelling seemed to help Zero. It gave him something to concentrate on besides
his pain and weakness.
It distracted Stanley as well. The next time he looked up at Big Thumb, it really did
seem closer.

72
They quit spelling words when it hurt too much to talk. Stanley's throat was dry. He
was weak and exhausted, yet as bad as he felt, he knew that Zero felt ten times worse.
As long as Zero could keep going, he could keep going, too.
It was possible, he thought, he hoped, that he didn't get any of the bad bacteria. Zero
hadn't been able to unscrew the lid. Maybe the bad germs couldn't get in, either. Maybe
the bacteria were only in the jars which opened easily, the ones he was now carrying in
his sack.
What scared Stanley the most about dying wasn't his actual death. He figured he
could handle the pain. It wouldn't be much worse than what he felt now. In fact, maybe
at the moment of his death he would be too weak to feel pain. Death would be a relief.
What worried him the most was the thought of his parents not knowing what happened
to him, not knowing whether he was dead or alive. He hated to imagine what it would
be like for his mother and father, day after day, month after month, not knowing, living
on false hope. For him, at least, it would be over. For his parents, the pain would never
end.
He wondered if the Warden would send out a search party to look for him. It didn't
seem likely. She didn't send anyone to look for Zero. But no one cared about Zero. They
simply destroyed his files.
But Stanley had a family. She couldn't pretend he was never there. He wondered
what she would tell them. And when?
"What do you think's up there?" Zero asked.
Stanley looked to the top of Big Thumb. "Oh, probably an Italian restaurant," he
said.
Zero managed to laugh.
"I think I'll get a pepperoni pizza and a large root beer," said Stanley.
"I want an ice cream sundae," said Zero. "With nuts and whipped cream, and
bananas, and hot fudge."
The sun was almost directly in front of them. The thumb pointed up toward it.
They came to the end of the lake. Huge white stone cliffs rose up before them.
Unlike the eastern shore, where Camp Green Lake was situated, the western shore
did not slope down gradually. It was as if they had been walking across the flat bottom
of a giant frying pan, and now they had to somehow climb up out of it.
They could no longer see Big Thumb. The cliffs blocked their view. The cliffs also
blocked out the sun.
Zero groaned and clutched his stomach, but he remained standing. "I'm all right," he
whispered.
Stanley saw a rut, about a foot wide and six inches deep, running down a cliff. On
either side of the rut were a series of ledges. "Let's try there," he said.
It looked to be about a fifty-foot climb, straight up.
Stanley still managed to hold the sack of jars in his left hand as he slowly moved up,
from ledge to ledge, crisscrossing the rut. At times he had to use the side of the rut for
support, in order to make it to the next ledge.

73
Zero stayed with him, somehow. His frail body trembled terribly as he climbed the
stone wall.
Some of the ledges were wide enough to sit on. Others stuck out no more than a few
inches? just enough for a quick step. Stanley stopped about two-thirds of the way up,
on a fairly wide ledge. Zero came up alongside him.
"You okay?" Stanley asked.
Zero gave the thumbs-up sign. Stanley did the same.
He looked above him. He wasn't sure how he'd get to the next ledge. It was three or
four feet above his head, and he didn't see any footholds. He was afraid to look down.
"Give me a boost," said Zero. "Then I'll pull you up with the shovel."
"You won't be able to pull me up," said Stanley.
"Yes, I will," said Zero.
Stanley cupped his hands together, and Zero stepped on his interwoven fingers. He
was able to lift Zero high enough for him to grab the protruding slab of rock. Stanley
continued to help him from below as Zero pulled himself onto the ledge.
While Zero was getting himself situated up there, Stanley ' attached the sack to the
shovel by poking a hole through the burlap. He held it up to Zero.
Zero first grabbed hold of the sack, then the shovel. He set the shovel so that half the
blade was supported by the rock slab. The wooden shaft hung down toward Stanley.
"Okay," he said.
Stanley doubted this would work. It was one thing for him to lift Zero, who was half
his weight. It was quite another for Zero to try to pull him up.
Stanley grabbed hold of the shovel as he climbed up the rock wall, using the sides of
the rut to help support him. His hands moved one over the other, up the shaft of the
shovel.
He felt Zero's hand clasp his wrist.
He let go of the shaft with one hand and grabbed the top of the ledge.
He gathered his strength and for a brief second seemed to defy gravity as he took a
quick step up the wall and, with Zero's help, pulled himself the rest of the way over the
ledge.
He caught his breath. There was no way he could have done that a few months ago.
He noticed a large spot of blood on his wrist. It took him a moment to realize that it
was Zero's blood.
Zero had deep gashes in both hands. He had held on to the metal blade of the shovel,
keeping it in place, as Stanley climbed.
Zero brought his hands to his mouth and sucked up his blood.
One of the glass jars had broken in the sack. They decided to save the pieces. They
might need to make a knife or something.
They rested briefly, then continued on up. It was a fairly easy climb the rest of the
way.
When they reached flat ground, Stanley looked up to see the sun, a fiery ball
balancing on top of Big Thumb. God was twirling a basketball.
Soon they were walking in the long thin shadow of the thumb.

74

37
"We're almost there," said Stanley. He could see the base of the mountain.
Now that they really were almost there, it scared him. Big Thumb was his only hope.
If there was no water, no refuge, then they'd have nothing, not even hope.
There was no exact place where the flat land stopped and the mountain began. The
ground got steeper and steeper, and then there was no doubt that they were heading up
the mountain.
Stanley could no longer see Big Thumb. The slope of the mountain was in the way.
It became too steep to go straight up. Instead they zigzagged back and forth,
increasing their altitude by small increments every time they changed directions.
Patches of weeds dotted the mountainside. They walked from one patch to another,
using the weeds as footholds. As they got higher, the weeds got thicker. Many had
thorns, and they had to be careful walking through them.
Stanley would have liked to stop and rest, but he was afraid they'd never get started
again. As long as Zero could keep going, he could keep going, too. Besides, he knew
they didn't have much daylight left.
As the sky darkened, bugs began appearing above the weed patches. A swarm of
gnats hovered around them, attracted by their sweat. Neither Stanley nor Zero had the
strength to try to swat at them.
"How are you doing?" Stanley asked.
Zero pointed thumbs up. Then he said, "If a gnat lands on me, it will knock me
over."
Stanley gave him some more words. "B-u-g-s," he spelled.
Zero concentrated hard, then said, "Boogs."
Stanley laughed.
A wide smile spread across Zero's sick and weary face as well. "Bugs," he said.
"Good," said Stanley. "Remember, it's a short 'u' if there's no 'e' at the end. "Okay,
here's a hard one. How about, l-u-n-c-h?"
"Luh? Luh-un? " Suddenly, Zero made a horrible, wrenching noise as he doubled
over and grabbed his stomach. His frail body shook violently, and he threw up,
emptying his stomach of the sploosh.
He leaned on his knees and took several deep breaths. Then he straightened up and
continued going.
The swarm of gnats stayed behind, preferring the contents of Zero's stomach to the
sweat on the boys' faces.
Stanley didn't give him any more words, thinking that he needed to save his strength.
But about ten or fifteen minutes later, Zero said, "Lunch."
As they climbed higher, the patches of weeds grew thicker, and they had to be
careful not to get their feet tangled in thorny vines. Stanley suddenly realized
something. There hadn't been any weeds on the lake.
"Weeds and bugs," he said. "There's got to be water around somewhere. We must
be getting close."

75
A wide clown-like smile spread across Zero's face. He flashed the thumbs-up sign,
then fell.
He didn't get up. Stanley bent over him. "C'mon, Zero," he urged. "We're getting
close. C'mon, Hector. Weeds and bugs. Weeds and boogs."
Stanley shook him. "I've already ordered your hot fudge sundae," he said. "They're
making it right now."
Zero said nothing.

38
Stanley took hold of Zero's forearms and pulled him upright. Then he stooped down
and let Zero fall over his right shoulder. He stood up, lifting Zero's worn-out body off
the ground.
He left the shovel and sack of jars behind as he continued up the mountain. Zero's
legs dangled in front of him.
Stanley couldn't see his feet, which made it difficult to walk through the tangled
patches of weeds and vines. He concentrated on one step at a time, carefully raising and
setting down each foot. He thought only about each step, and not the impossible task
that lay before him.
Higher and higher he climbed. His strength came from somewhere deep inside
himself and also seemed to come from the outside as well. After focusing on Big
Thumb for so long, it was as if the rock had absorbed his energy and now acted like a
kind of giant magnet pulling him toward it.
After a while he became aware of a foul odor. At first he thought it came from Zero,
but it seemed to be in the air, hanging heavy all around him.
He also noticed that the ground wasn't as steep anymore. As the ground flattened, a
huge stone precipice rose up ahead of him, just barely visible in the moonlight. It
seemed to grow bigger with each step he took.
It no longer resembled a thumb.
And he knew he'd never be able to climb it.
Around him, the smell became stronger. It was the bitter smell of despair.
Even if he could somehow climb Big Thumb, he knew he wouldn't find water. How
could there be water at the top of a giant rock? The weeds and bugs survived only by an
occasional rainstorm, like the one he had seen from camp.
Still, he continued toward it. If nothing else, he wanted to at least reach the Thumb.
He never made it.
His feet slipped out from under him. Zero's head knocked against the back of his
shoulder as he fell and tumbled into a small muddy gully.
As he lay face down in the muddy ditch, he didn't know if he'd ever get up again. He
didn't know if he'd even try. Had he come all this way just to . . . You need water to
make mud!
He crawled along the gully in the direction that seemed the muddiest. The ground
became gloppier. The mud splashed up as he slapped the ground.

76
Using both hands, he dug a hole in the soggy soil. It was too dark to see, but he
thought he could feel a tiny pool of water at the bottom of his hole. He stuck his head in
the hole and licked the dirt.
He dug deeper, and as he did so, more water seemed to fill the hole. He couldn't see
it, but he could feel it? first with his fingers, then with his tongue.
He dug until he had a hole that was about as deep as his arm was long. There was
enough water for him to scoop out with his hands and drop on Zero's face.
Zero's eyes remained closed. But his tongue poked out between his lips, searching
out the droplets.
Stanley dragged Zero closer to the hole. He dug, then scooped some more water and
let it pour out of his hands into Zero's mouth.
As he continued to widen his hole, his hand came across a smooth, round object. It
was too smooth and too round to be a rock.
He wiped the dirt off of it and realized it was an onion.
He bit into it without peeling it. The hot bitter juice burst into his mouth. He could
feel it all the way up to his eyes. And when he swallowed, he felt its warmth move down
his throat and into his stomach.
He only ate half. He gave the other half to Zero.
"Here, eat this."
"What is it?" Zero whispered.
"A hot fudge sundae."

39
Stanley awoke in a meadow, looking up at the giant rock tower. It was layered and
streaked with different shades of red, burnt orange, brown, and tan. It must have been
over a hundred feet tall.
Stanley lay awhile, just looking at it. He didn't have the strength to get up. It felt like
the insides of his mouth and throat were coated with sand.
And no wonder. When he rolled over he saw the water hole. It was about two and a
half feet deep and over three feet wide. At the bottom lay no more than two inches of
very brown water.
His hands and fingers were sore from digging, especially under his fingernails. He
scooped some dirty water into his mouth, then swished it around, trying to filter it with
his teeth.
Zero moaned.
Stanley started to say something to him, but no words came out of his mouth, and he
had to try again. "How you doing?" It hurt to talk.
"Not good," Zero said quietly. With great effort, he rolled over, raised himself to his
knees, and crawled to the water hole. He lowered his head into it and lapped up some
water.
Then he jerked back, clutched his knees to his chest, and rolled to his side. His body
shook violently.

77
Stanley thought about going back down the mountain to look for the shovel, so he
could make the water hole deeper. Maybe that would give them cleaner water. They
could use the jars as drinking glasses.
But he didn't think he had the strength to go down, let alone make it back up again.
And he didn't know where to look.
He struggled to his feet. He was in a field of greenish white flowers that seemed to
extend all the way around Big Thumb.
He took a deep breath, then walked the last fifty yards to the giant precipice and
touched it.
Tag, you're it.
Then he walked back to Zero and the water hole. On the way he picked one of the
flowers. It actually wasn't one big flower, he discovered, but instead each flower was
really a cluster of tiny little flowers that formed a round ball. He brought it to his mouth
but had to spit it out.
He could see part of the trail he had made the night before, when he carried Zero up
the mountain. If he was going to head back down and look for the shovel, he realized,
he should do it soon, while the trail was fresh. But he didn't want to leave Zero. He was
afraid Zero might die while he was gone.
Zero was still lying doubled over on his side. "I got to tell you something," he said
with a groan.
"Don't talk," said Stanley. "Save your strength."
"No, listen," Zero insisted, then he closed his eyes as his face twisted with pain.
"I'm listening," Stanley whispered.
"I took your shoes," Zero said.
Stanley didn't know what he was talking about. His shoes were on his feet. "That's
all right," he said. "Just rest now."
"It's all my fault," said Zero.
"It's nobody's fault," said Stanley.
"I didn't know," Zero said.
"That's okay," Stanley said. "Just rest."
Zero closed his eyes. But then again he said, "I didn't know about the shoes."
"What shoes?"
"From the shelter."
It took a moment for Stanley to comprehend. "Clyde Livingston's shoes?"
"I'm sorry," said Zero.
Stanley stared at him. It was impossible. Zero was delirious.
Zero's "confession" seemed to bring him some relief. The muscles in his face
relaxed. As he drifted into sleep, Stanley softly sang him the song that had been in his
family for generations.
"If only, if only," the woodpecker sighs,
"The bark on the tree was just a little bit softer."
While the wolf waits below, hungry and lonely,
He cries to the moo? oo? oon,

78

"If only, if only."

40
When Stanley found the onion the night before, he didn't question how it had come
to be there. He ate it gratefully. But now as he sat gazing at Big Thumb and the meadow
full of flowers, he couldn't help but wonder about it.
If there was one wild onion, there could be more.
He intertwined his fingers and tried to rub out the pain. Then he bent down and dug
up another flower, this time pulling up the entire plant, including the root.
"Onions! Fresh, hot, sweet onions," Sam called as Mary Lou pulled the cart down
Main Street. "Eight cents a dozen."
It was a beautiful spring morning. The sky was painted pale blue and pink? the
same color as the lake and the peach trees along its shore.
Mrs. Gladys Tennyson was wearing just her nightgown and robe as she came
running down the street after Sam. Mrs. Tennyson was normally a very proper woman
who never went out in public without dressing up in fine clothes and a hat. So it was
quite surprising to the people of Green Lake to see her running past them.
"Sam!" she shouted.
"Whoa, Mary Lou," said Sam, stopping his mule and cart. "G'morning, Mrs.
Tennyson," he said. "How's little Becca doing?"
Gladys Tennyson was all smiles. "I think she's going to be all right. The fever broke
about an hour ago. Thanks to you."
"I'm sure the good Lord and Doc Hawthorn deserve most of the credit."
"The Good Lord, yes," agreed Mrs. Tennyson, "but not Dr. Hawthorn. That quack
wanted to put leeches on her stomach! Leeches! My word! He said they would suck out
the bad blood. Now you tell me. How would a leech know good blood from bad
blood?"
"I wouldn't know," said Sam.
"It was your onion tonic," said Mrs. Tennyson. "That's what saved her."
Other townspeople made their way to the cart. "Good morning, Gladys," said Hattie
Parker. "Don't you look lovely this morning."
Several people snickered.
"Good morning, Hattie," Mrs. Tennyson replied.
"Does your husband know you're parading about in your bed clothes?" Hattie
asked.
There were more snickers.
"My husband knows exactly where I am and how I am dressed, thank you," said
Mrs. Tennyson. "We have both been up all night and half the morning with Rebecca.
She almost died from stomach sickness. It seems she ate some bad meat."
Hattie's face flushed. Her husband, Jim Parker, was the butcher.

79
"It made my husband and me sick as well," said Mrs. Tennyson, "but it nearly killed
Becca, what with her being so young. Sam saved her life."
"It wasn't me," said Sam. "It was the onions."
"I'm glad Becca's all right," Hattie said contritely.
"I keep telling Jim he needs to wash his knives," said Mr. Pike, who owned the
general store.
Hattie Parker excused herself, then turned and quickly walked away.
"Tell Becca that when she feels up to it to come by the store for a piece of candy,"
said Mr. Pike.
"Thank you, I'll do that."
Before returning home, Mrs. Tennyson bought a dozen onions from Sam. She gave
him a dime and told him to keep the change.
"I don't take charity," Sam told her. "But if you want to buy a few extra onions for
Mary Lou, I'm sure she'd appreciate it."
"All right then," said Mrs. Tennyson, "give me my change in onions."
Sam gave Mrs. Tennyson an additional three onions, and she fed them one at a time
to Mary Lou. She laughed as the old donkey ate them out of her hand.
Stanley and Zero slept off and on for the next two days, ate onions, all they wanted,
and splashed dirty water into their mouths. In the late afternoon Big Thumb gave them
shade. Stanley tried to make the hole deeper, but he really needed the shovel. His efforts
just seemed to stir up the mud and make the water dirtier.
Zero was sleeping. He was still very sick and weak, but the sleep and the onions
seemed to be doing him some good. Stanley was no longer afraid that he would die
soon. Still, he didn't want to go for the shovel while Zero was asleep. He didn't want
him to wake up and think he'd been deserted.
He waited for Zero to open his eyes.
"I think I'll go look for the shovel," Stanley said.
"I'll wait here," Zero said feebly, as if he had any other choice.
Stanley headed down the mountain. The sleep and the onions had done him a lot of
good as well. He felt strong.
It was fairly easy to follow the trail he had made two days earlier. There were a few
places where he wasn't sure he was going the right way, but it just took a little bit of
searching before he found the trail again.
He went quite a ways down the mountain but still didn't find the shovel. He looked
back up toward the top of the mountain. He must have walked right past it, he thought.
There was no way he could have carried Zero all the way up from here.
Still, he headed downward, just in case. He came to a bare spot between two large
patches of weeds and sat down to rest. Now he had definitely gone too far, he decided.
He was tired out from walking down the hill. It would have been impossible to have
carried Zero up the hill from here, especially after walking all day with no food or water.
The shovel must be buried in some weeds.

80
Before starting back up, he took one last look around in all directions. He saw a
large indentation in the weeds a little farther down the mountain. It didn't seem likely
that the shovel could be there, but he'd already come this far.
There, lying in some tall weeds, he found the shovel and the sack of jars. He was
amazed. He wondered if the shovel and sack might have rolled down the hill. But none
of the jars were broken, except the one which had broken earlier. And if they had rolled
down the hill, it is doubtful that he would have found the sack and shovel side by side.
On his way back up the mountain, Stanley had to sit down and rest several times. It
was a long, hard climb.

41
Zero's condition continued to improve.
Stanley slowly peeled an onion. He liked eating them one layer at a time.
The water hole was now almost as large as the holes he had dug back at Camp
Green Lake. It contained almost two feet of murky water. Stanley had dug it all himself.
Zero had offered to help, but Stanley thought it better for Zero to save his strength. It
was a lot harder to dig in water than it was in a dry lake.
Stanley was surprised that he himself hadn't gotten sick? either from the sploosh,
the dirty water, or from living on onions. He used to get sick quite a lot back at home.
Both boys were barefoot. They had washed their socks. All their clothes were very
dirty, but their socks were definitely the worst.
They didn't dip their socks into the hole, afraid to contaminate the water. Instead
they filled the jars and poured the water over their dirty socks.
"I didn't go to the homeless shelter very often," Zero said. "Just if the weather was
really bad. I'd have to find someone to pretend to be my mom. If I'd just gone by myself,
they would have asked me a bunch of questions. If they'd found out I didn't have a mom,
they would have made me a ward of the state."
"What's a ward of the state?"
Zero smiled. "I don't know. But I didn't like the sound of it."
Stanley remembered Mr. Pendanski telling the Warden that Zero was a ward of the
state. He wondered if Zero knew he'd become one.
"I liked sleeping outside," said Zero. "I used to pretend I was a Cub Scout. I always
wanted to be a Cub Scout. I'd see them at the park in their blue uniforms."
"I was never a Cub Scout," said Stanley. "I wasn't good at social stuff like that. Kids
made fun of me because I was fat."
"I liked the blue uniforms," said Zero. "Maybe I wouldn't have liked being a Cub
Scout."
Stanley shrugged one shoulder.
"My mother was once a Girl Scout," said Zero.
"I thought you said you didn't have a mother."
"Everybody has to have a mother."
"Well, yeah, I know that."

81
"She said she once won a prize for selling the most Girl Scout cookies," said Zero.
"She was real proud of that."
Stanley peeled off another layer of his onion.
"We always took what we needed," Zero said. "When I was little, I didn't even
know it was stealing. I don't remember when I found out. But we just took what we
needed, never more. So when I saw the shoes on display in the shelter, I just reached in
the glass case and took them."
"Clyde Livingston's shoes?" asked Stanley.
"I didn't know they were his. I just thought they were somebody's old shoes. It was
better to take someone's old shoes, I thought, than steal a pair of new ones. I didn't know
they were famous. There was a sign, but of course I couldn't read it. Then, the next thing
I know everybody's making this big deal about how the shoes are missing. It was kind
of funny, in a way. The whole place is going crazy. There I was, wearing the shoes, and
everyone's running around saying, 'What happened to the shoes?' 'The shoes are gone!'
I just walked out the door. No one noticed me. When I got outside, I ran around the
corner and immediately took off the shoes. I put them on top of a parked car. I
remember they smelled really bad."
"Yeah, those were them," said Stanley. "Did they fit you?"
"Pretty much."
Stanley remembered being surprised at Clyde Livingston's small shoe size.
Stanley's shoes were bigger. Clyde Livingston had small, quick feet. Stanley's feet were
big and slow.
"I should have just kept them," said Zero. "I'd already made it out of the shelter and
everything. I ended up getting arrested the next day when I tried to walk out of a shoe
store with a new pair of sneakers. If I had just kept those old smelly sneakers, then
neither of us would be here right now."

42
Zero became strong enough to help dig the hole. When he finished, it was over six
feet deep. He filled the bottom with rocks to help separate the water from the dirt.
He was still the best hole digger around.
"That's the last hole I will ever dig," he declared, throwing down the shovel.
Stanley smiled. He wished it were true, but he knew they had no choice but to
eventually return to Camp Green Lake. They couldn't live on onions forever.
They had been completely around Big Thumb. It was like a giant sundial. They
followed the shade.
They were able to see out in all directions. There was no place to go. The mountain
was surrounded by desert.
Zero stared at Big Thumb. "It must have a hole in it," he said, "filled with water."
"You think?"
"Where else could the water be coming from?" Zero asked. "Water doesn't run
uphill."

82
Stanley bit into an onion. It didn't burn his eyes or nose, and, in fact, he no longer
noticed a particularly strong taste.
He remembered when he had first carried Zero up the hill, how the air had smelled
bitter. It was the smell of thousands of onions, growing and rotting and sprouting.
Now he didn't smell a thing.
"How many onions do you think we've eaten?" he asked.
Zero shrugged. "I don't even know how long we've been here."
"I'd say about a week," said Stanley. "And we probably each eat about twenty
onions a day, so that's . . ."
"Two hundred and eighty onions," said Zero.
Stanley smiled. "I bet we really stink."
Two nights later, Stanley lay awake staring up at the star-filled sky. He was too
happy to fall asleep.
He knew he had no reason to be happy. He had heard or read somewhere that right
before a person freezes to death, he suddenly feels nice and warm. He wondered if
perhaps he was experiencing something like that.
It occurred to him that he couldn't remember the last time he felt happiness. It wasn't
just being sent to Camp Green Lake that had made his life miserable. Before that he'd
been unhappy at school, where he had no friends, and bullies like Derrick Dunne picked
on him. No one liked him, and the truth was, he didn't especially like himself.
He liked himself now.
He wondered if he was delirious.
He looked over at Zero sleeping near him. Zero's face was lit in the starlight, and
there was a flower petal in front of his nose that moved back and forth as he breathed. It
reminded Stanley of something out of a cartoon. Zero breathed in, and the petal was
drawn up almost touching his nose. Zero breathed out, and the petal moved toward his
chin. It stayed on Zero's face for an amazingly long time before fluttering off to the side.
Stanley considered placing it back in front of Zero's nose, but it wouldn't be the
same.
It seemed like Zero had lived at Camp Green Lake forever, but as Stanley thought
about it now, he realized that Zero must have gotten there no more than a month or two
before him. Zero was actually arrested a day later. But Stanley's trial kept getting
delayed because of baseball.
He remembered what Zero had said a few days before. If Zero had just kept those
shoes, then neither of them would be here right now.
As Stanley stared at the glittering night sky, he thought there was no place he would
rather be. He was glad Zero put the shoes on the parked car. He was glad they fell from
the overpass and hit him on the head.
When the shoes first fell from the sky, he remembered thinking that destiny had
struck him. Now, he thought so again. It was more than a coincidence. It had to be
destiny.

83
Maybe they wouldn't have to return to Camp Green Lake, he thought. Maybe they
could make it past the camp, then follow the dirt road back to civilization. They could
fill the sack with onions, and the three jars with water. And he had his canteen as well.
They could refill their jars and canteen at the camp. Maybe sneak into the kitchen
and get some food.
He doubted any counselors were still on guard. Everyone had to think they were
dead. Buzzard food.
It would mean living the rest of his life as a fugitive. The police would always be
after him. At least he could call his parents and tell them he was still alive. But he
couldn't go visit them, in case the police were watching the apartment. Although, if
everyone thought he was dead, they wouldn't bother to watch the apartment. He would
have to somehow get a new identity.
Now, I'm really thinking crazy, he thought. He wondered if a crazy person wonders
if he's crazy.
But even as he thought this, an even crazier idea kept popping into his head. He
knew it was too crazy to even consider. Still, if he was going to be a fugitive for the rest
of his life, it would help to have some money, perhaps a treasure chest full of money.
You're crazy! he told himself. Besides, just because he found a lipstick container
with K B on it, that didn't mean there was treasure buried there.
It was crazy. It was all part of his crazy feeling of happiness.
Or maybe it was destiny.
He reached over and shook Zero's arm. "Hey, Zero," he whispered.
"Huh?" Zero muttered.
"Zero, wake up."
"What?" Zero raised up his head. "What is it?"
"You want to dig one more hole?" Stanley asked him.

43
"We weren't always homeless," Zero said. "I remember a yellow room."
"How old were you when you . . ." Stanley started to ask, but couldn't find the right
words. ". . . moved out?"
"I don't know. I must have been real little, because I don't remember too much. I
don't remember moving out. I remember standing in a crib, with my mother singing to
me. She held my wrists and made my hands clap together. She used to sing that song to
me. That one you sang . . . It was different, though . . ."
Zero spoke slowly, as if searching his brain for memories and clues. "And then later
I know we lived on the street, but I don't know why we left the house. I'm pretty sure it
was a house, and not an apartment. I know my room was yellow."
It was late afternoon. They were resting in the shadow of the Thumb. They had
spent the morning picking onions and putting them in the sack. It didn't take long, but
long enough so that they had to wait another day before heading down the mountain.

84
They wanted to leave at the first hint of daylight, so they'd have plenty of time to
make it to Camp Green Lake before dark. Stanley wanted to be sure he could find the
right hole. Then, they would hide by it until everyone went to sleep.
They would dig for as long as it seemed safe, and not a second longer. And then,
treasure or no treasure, they'd head up the dirt road. If it was absolutely safe, they'd try
to steal some food and water from the camp kitchen.
"I'm good at sneaking in and out of places," Zero had said.
"Remember," Stanley had warned. "The door to the Wreck Room squeaks."
Now he lay on his back, trying to save his strength for the long days ahead. He
wondered what happened to Zero's parents, but he didn't ask. Zero didn't like answering
questions. It was better to just let him talk when he felt like it.
Stanley thought about his own parents. In her last letter, his mom was worried that
they might be evicted from their apartment because of the smell of burning sneakers.
They could easily become homeless as well.
Again, he wondered if they'd been told that he ran away from camp. Were they told
that he was dead?
An image appeared in his head of his parents hugging each other and crying. He
tried not to think about it.
Instead he tried to recapture the feelings he'd had the night before? the inexplicable
feeling of happiness, the sense of destiny. But those feelings didn't return.
He just felt scared.
The next morning they headed down the mountain. They'd dunked their caps in the
water hole before putting them on their heads. Zero held the shovel, and Stanley carried
the sack, which was crammed with onions and the three jars of water. They left the
pieces of the broken jar on the mountain.
"This is where I found the shovel," Stanley said, pointing out a patch of weeds.
Zero turned and looked up toward the top of the mountain. "That's a long way."
"You were light," Stanley said. "You'd already thrown up everything that was
inside your stomach."
He shifted the sack from one shoulder to the other. It was heavy. He stepped on a
loose rock, slipped, then fell hard. The next thing he knew he was sliding down the
steep side of the mountain. He dropped the sack, and onions spilled around him.
He slid into a patch of weeds and grabbed onto a thorny vine. The vine ripped out of
the earth, but slowed him enough so that he was able to stop himself.
"Are you all right?" Zero asked from above.
Stanley groaned as he pulled a thorn out of the palm of his hand. "Yeah," he said.
He was all right. He was worried more about the jars of water.
Zero climbed down after him, retrieving the sack along the way. Stanley pulled
some thorns out of his pant legs.
The jars hadn't broken. The onions had protected them, like Styrofoam packing
material. "Glad you didn't do that when you were carrying me," Zero said.

85
They'd lost about a third of the onions, but recovered many of them as they
continued down the mountain. When they reached the bottom, the sun was just rising
above the lake. They walked directly toward it.
Soon they stood on the edge of a cliff, looking down on the dry lake bed. Stanley
wasn't sure, but he thought he could see the remains of the Mary Lou off in the distance.
"You thirsty?" Stanley asked.
"No," said Zero. "How about you."
"No," Stanley lied. He didn't want to be the first one to take a drink. Although they
didn't mention it, it had become a kind of challenge between him and Zero.
They climbed down into the frying pan. It was a different spot from where they had
climbed up. They eased themselves down from one ledge to another, and let themselves
slide in other places, being especially careful with the sack.
Stanley could no longer see the Mary Lou, but headed in what he thought was the
right direction. As the sun rose, so did the familiar haze of heat and dirt.
"You thirsty?" Zero asked.
"No," said Stanley.
"Because you have three full jars of water," said Zero. "I thought maybe it was
getting too heavy for you. If you drink some, it will lighten your load."
"I'm not thirsty," said Stanley. "But if you want a drink, I'll give you some."
"I'm not thirsty," said Zero. "I was just worried about you."
Stanley smiled. "I'm a camel," he said.
They walked for what seemed like a very long time, and still never came across the
Mary Lou. Stanley was pretty sure they were heading in the right direction. He
remembered that when they left the boat, they were headed toward the setting sun. Now
they were headed toward the rising sun. He knew the sun didn't rise and set exactly in
the east and west; more southeast and southwest, but he wasn't sure how that made a
difference.
His throat felt as if it was coated with sandpaper. "You sure you're not thirsty?" he
asked.
"Not me," said Zero. His voice was dry and raspy.
When they did finally take a drink, they agreed to do it at the same time. Zero, who
was now carrying the sack, set it down and took out two jars, giving one to Stanley.
They decided to save the canteen for last, since it couldn't accidentally break.
"You know I'm not thirsty," Stanley said, as he unscrewed the lid. "I'm just drinking
so you will."
"I'm just drinking so you will," said Zero.
They clinked the jars together and, each watching the other, poured the water into
their stubborn mouths.
Zero was the first to spot the Mary Lou, maybe a quarter mile away, and just a little
off to the right. They headed for it.
It wasn't even noon yet when they reached the boat. They sat against the shady side
and rested.

86
"I don't know what happened to my mother," Zero said. "She left and never came
back."
Stanley peeled an onion.
"She couldn't always take me with her," Zero said. "Sometimes she had to do things
by herself."
Stanley had the feeling that Zero was explaining things to himself.
"She'd tell me to wait in a certain place for her. When I was real little, I had to wait
in small areas, like on a porch step or a doorway. 'Now don't leave here until I get back,'
she'd say.
"I never liked it when she left. I had a stuffed animal, a little giraffe, and I'd hug it
the whole time she was gone. When I got bigger I was allowed to stay in bigger areas.
Like, 'Stay on this block.' Or, 'Don't leave the park.' But even then, I still held Jaffy."
Stanley guessed that Jaffy was the name of Zero's giraffe.
"And then one day she didn't come back," Zero said. His voice sounded suddenly
hollow. "I waited for her at Laney Park."
"Laney Park," said Stanley. "I've been there."
"You know the playscape?" asked Zero.
"Yeah. I've played on it."
"I waited there for more than a month," said Zero. "You know that tunnel that you
crawl through, between the slide and the swinging bridge? That's where I slept."
They ate four onions apiece and drank about half a jar of water. Stanley stood up
and looked around. Everything looked the same in all directions.
"When I left camp, I was heading straight toward Big Thumb," he said. "I saw the
boat off to the right. So that means we have to turn a little to the left."
Zero was lost in thought. "What? Okay," he said.
They headed out. It was Stanley's turn to carry the sack.
"Some kids had a birthday party," Zero said. "I guess it was about two weeks after
my mother left. There was a picnic table next to the playscape and balloons were tied to
it. The kids looked to be the same age as me. One girl said hi to me and asked me if I
wanted to play. I wanted to, but I didn't. I knew I didn't belong at the party, even though
it wasn't their playscape. There was this one mother who kept staring at me like I was
some kind of monster. Then later a boy asked me if I wanted a piece of cake, but then
that same mother told me, 'Go away!' and she told all the kids to stay away from me, so
I never got the piece of cake. I ran away so fast, I forgot Jaffy."
"Did you ever find him? it?"
For a moment, Zero didn't answer. Then he said, "He wasn't real."
Stanley thought again about his own parents, how awful it would be for them to
never know if he was dead or alive. He realized that was how Zero must have felt, not
knowing what happened to his own mother. He wondered why Zero never mentioned
his father.
"Hold on," Zero said, stopping abruptly. "We're going the wrong way."
"No, this is right," said Stanley.
"You were heading toward Big Thumb when you saw the boat off to your right,"
said Zero. "That means we should have turned right when we left the boat."

87

"You sure?"
Zero drew a diagram in the dirt.
Stanley still wasn't sure.
"We need to go this way," Zero said, first drawing a line on the map and then
heading that way himself.
Stanley followed. It didn't feel right to him, but Zero seemed sure.
Sometime in the middle of the afternoon, a cloud drifted across the sky and blocked
out the sun. It was a welcome relief. Once again, Stanley felt that destiny was on his
side.
Zero stopped and held out his arm to stop Stanley, too.
"Listen," Zero whispered.
Stanley didn't hear anything.
They continued walking very quietly and Stanley began to make out the faint
sounds of Camp Green Lake. They were still too far away to see the camp, but he could
hear a blend of indistinct voices. As they got closer he occasionally could hear Mr. Sir's
distinctive bark.
They walked slowly and quietly, aware that sounds travel in both directions.
They approached a cluster of holes. "Let's wait here, until they go in," said Zero.
Stanley nodded. He checked to make sure there was nothing living in it, then
climbed down into a hole. Zero climbed into the one next to him.
Despite having gone the wrong way for a while, it hadn't taken them nearly as long
as Stanley had expected. Now, they just had to wait.
The sun cut through the cloud, and Stanley felt its rays beating down on him. But
soon more clouds filled the sky, shading Stanley and his hole.
He waited until he was certain the last of the campers had finished for the day.
Then he waited a little longer.
As quietly as possible, he and Zero climbed up out of their holes and crept toward
camp. Stanley held the sack in front of him, cradled in his arms, instead of over his
shoulder, to keep the jars from clanking against each other. A wave of terror rushed
over him when he saw the compound? the tents, the Wreck Room, the Warden's cabin
under the two oak trees. The fear made him dizzy. He took a breath, summoned his
courage, and continued.
"That's the one," he whispered, pointing out the hole where he had found the gold
tube. It was still about fifty yards away, but Stanley was pretty sure it was the right hole.
There was no need to risk going any closer.
They climbed down into adjacent holes, and waited for the camp to fall asleep.

44
Stanley tried to sleep, not knowing when he'd get the chance again. He heard the
showers and, later, the sounds of dinner. He heard the creaking of the Wreck Room
door. His fingers drummed against the side of the hole. He heard his own heart heat.

88
He took a drink from the canteen. He had given Zero the water jars. They each had
a good supply of onions.
He wasn't sure how long he remained in the hole, maybe five hours. He was
surprised when he heard Zero whispering for him to wake up. He didn't think he'd fallen
asleep. If he had, he thought it must have just been for the last five minutes. Although,
when he opened his eyes, he was surprised how dark it was.
There was only one light on at camp, in the office. The sky was cloudy, so there was
very little starlight. Stanley could see a sliver of a moon, which appeared and
disappeared among the clouds.
He carefully led Zero to the hole, which was hard to find in the darkness. He
stumbled over a small pile of dirt. "I think this is it," he whispered.
"You think?" Zero asked.
"It's it," said Stanley, sounding more certain than he really was. He climbed down.
Zero handed him the shovel.
Stanley stuck the shovel into the dirt at the bottom of the hole and stepped on the
back of the blade. He felt it sink beneath his weight. He scooped out some dirt and
tossed it off to the side. Then he brought the shovel back down.
Zero watched for a while. "I'm going to try to refill the water jars," he said.
Stanley took a deep breath and exhaled. "Be careful," he said, then continued
digging.
It was so dark, he couldn't even see the end of his shovel. For all he knew he could
be digging up gold and diamonds instead of dirt. He brought each shovelful close to his
face, to try to see if anything was there, before dumping it out of the hole.
As he made the hole deeper, it became harder to lift the dirt up and out. It was five
feet deep before he even started. He decided to use his efforts to make it wider instead.
This made more sense, he told himself. If Kate Barlow had buried a treasure chest,
she probably wouldn't have been able to dig much deeper, so why should he?
Of course, Kate Barlow probably had a whole gang of thieves helping her.
"You want some breakfast?"
Stanley jumped at the sound of Zero's voice. He hadn't heard him approach.
Zero handed down a box of cereal. Stanley carefully poured some cereal into his
mouth. He didn't want to put his dirty hands inside the box. He nearly gagged on the
ultra-sweet taste. They were sugar-frosted flakes, and after eating nothing but onions
for more than a week, he had trouble adjusting to the flavor. He washed them down
with a swig of water.
Zero took over the digging. Stanley sifted his fingers through the fresh piles of dirt,
in case he had missed anything. He wished he had a flashlight. A diamond no bigger
than a pebble would be worth thousands of dollars. Yet there was no way he'd see it.
They finished the water that Zero had gotten from the spigot by the showers.
Stanley said he'd go fill the jars again, but Zero insisted that he do it instead. "No
offense, but you make too much noise when you walk. You're too big."
Stanley returned to the hole. As the hole grew wider, parts of the surface kept
caving in. They were running out of room. To make it much wider, they would first

89
have to move some of the surrounding dirt piles out of the way. He wondered how
much time they had before the camp woke up.
"How's it going?" Zero asked when he returned with the water.
Stanley shrugged one shoulder. He brought the shovel down the side of the hole,
shaving off a slice of the dirt wall. As he did so, he felt the shovel bounce off something
hard.
"What was that?" Zero asked.
Stanley didn't know. He moved his shovel up and down the side of the hole. As the
dirt chipped and flaked away, the hard object became more pronounced.
It was sticking out of the side of the hole, about a foot and a half from the bottom.
He felt it with his hands.
"What is it?" Zero asked.
He could just feel a corner of it. Most of it was still buried. It had the cool, smooth
texture of metal. "I think I might have found the treasure chest," he said. His voice was
filled more with astonishment than with excitement.
"Really?" asked Zero.
"I think so," Stanley said.
The hole was wide enough for him to hold the shovel lengthwise and dig sideways
into the wall. He knew he had to dig very carefully. He didn't want the side of the hole
to collapse, along with the huge pile of dirt directly above it.
He scraped at the dirt wall, until he exposed one entire side of the box-like object.
He ran his fingers over it. It felt to be about eight inches tall, and almost two feet wide.
He had no way of knowing how far into the earth it extended. He tried pulling it out, but
it wouldn't budge.
He was afraid that the only way to get to it was to start back up at the surface, and
dig down. They didn't have time for that.
"I'm going to try to dig a hole underneath it," he said. "Then maybe I can pull it
down and slip it out."
"Go for it," said Zero.
Stanley jammed the shovel into the bottom edge of his hole, and carefully began to
dig a tunnel underneath the metal object. He hoped it didn't cave in.
Occasionally he'd stop, stoop down, and try to feel the far end of the box. But even
when the tunnel was as long as his arm, he still couldn't feel the other side.
Once again he tried pulling it out, but it was firmly in the ground. If he pulled too
hard, he feared, he'd cause a cave-in. He knew that when he was ready to pull it out, he
would have to do it quickly, before the ground above it collapsed.
As his tunnel grew deeper and wider? and more precarious? Stanley was able to
feel latches on one end of the box, and then a leather handle. It wasn't really a box. "I
think it might be some kind of metal suitcase," he told Zero.
"Can you pry it loose with the shovel?" Zero suggested.
"I'm afraid the side of the hole will collapse."
"You might as well give it a try," said Zero.
Stanley took a sip of water. "Might as well," he said.

90
He forced the tip of the shovel between the dirt and the top of the metal case and
tried to wedge it free. He wished he could see what he was doing.
He worked the end of the shovel, back and forth, up and down, until he felt the
suitcase fall free. Then he felt the dirt come piling down on top of it.
But it wasn't a huge cave-in. As he knelt down in the hole, he could tell that only a
small portion of the earth had collapsed.
He dug with his hands until he found the leather handle, and then he pulled the
suitcase up and out of the dirt. "I got it!" he exclaimed.
It was heavy. He handed it up to Zero.
"You did it," Zero said, taking it from him.
"We did it," said Stanley.
He gathered his remaining strength, and tried to pull himself up out of the hole.
Suddenly, a bright light was shining in his face.
"Thank you," said the Warden. "You boys have been a big help."

45
The beam of the flashlight was directed away from Stanley's eyes and onto Zero,
who was sitting on his knees. The suitcase was on his lap.
Mr. Pendanski was holding the flashlight. Mr. Sir stood next to him with his gun
drawn and pointed in the same direction. Mr. Sir was barefoot and bare-chested,
wearing only his pajama bottoms.
The Warden moved toward Zero. She was also in her bed clothes, wearing an
extra-long T-shirt. Unlike Mr. Sir, however, she had on her boots.
Mr. Pendanski was the only one fully dressed. Perhaps he had been on guard duty.
Off in the distance, Stanley could see two more flashlights bobbing toward them in
the darkness. He felt helpless in the hole.
"You boys arrived just in the nick? " the Warden started to say. She stopped talking
and she stopped walking. Then she slowly backed away.
A lizard had crawled up on top of the suitcase. Its big red eyes glowed in the beam
of the flashlight. Its mouth was open, and Stanley could see its white tongue moving in
and out between its black teeth.
Zero sat as still as a statue.
A second lizard crawled up over the side of the suitcase and stopped less than an
inch away from Zero's little finger.
Stanley was afraid to look, and afraid not to. He wondered if he should try to
scramble out of the hole before the lizards turned on him, but he didn't want to cause
any commotion.
The second lizard crawled across Zero's fingers and halfway up his arm.
It occurred to Stanley that the lizards were probably on the suitcase when he handed
it to Zero.

91
"There's another one!" gasped Mr. Pendanski. He shined the flashlight on the box of
Frosted Flakes, which lay on its side beside Stanley's hole. A lizard was crawling out of
it.
The light also illuminated Stanley's hole. He glanced downward and had to force
himself to suppress a scream. He was standing in a lizard nest. He felt the scream
explode inside him.
He could see six lizards. There were three on the ground, two on his left leg, and one
on his right sneaker.
He tried to remain very still. Something was crawling up the back of his neck.
Three other counselors approached the area. Stanley heard one say, "What's
going? " and then whisper, "Oh my God."
"What do we do?" asked Mr. Pendanski.
"We wait," said the Warden. "It won't be very long."
"At least we'll have a body to give that woman," said Mr. Pendanski.
"She's going to ask a lot of questions," said Mr. Sir. "And this time she'll have the
A.G. with her."
"Let her ask her questions," said the Warden. "Just so long as I have the suitcase, I
don't care what happens. Do you know how long . . ." Her voice trailed off, then started
up again. "When I was little I'd watch my parents dig holes, every weekend and holiday.
When I got bigger, I had to dig, too. Even on Christmas."
Stanley felt tiny claws dig into the side of his face as the lizard pulled itself off his
neck and up past his chin.
"It won't be long now," the Warden said.
Stanley could hear his heart beat. Each beat told him he was still alive, at least for
one more second.

46
Five hundred seconds later, his heart was still beating.
Mr. Pendanski screamed. The lizard which had been in the cereal box was springing
toward him.
Mr. Sir shot it in midair.
Stanley felt the blast shatter the air around him. The lizards scurried frantically
across his very still body. He did not flinch. A lizard ran across his closed mouth.
He glanced at Zero and Zero's eyes met his. Somehow they were both still alive, at
least for one more second, one more heartbeat.
Mr. Sir lit a cigarette.
"I thought you quit," said one of the other counselors.
"Yeah, well, sometimes sunflower seeds just won't cut it." He took a long drag on
his cigarette. "I'm going to have nightmares the rest of my life."
"Maybe we should just shoot them," suggested Mr. Pendanski.
"Who?" asked a counselor. "The lizards or the kids?"

92
Mr. Pendanski laughed grimly. "The kids are going to die anyway." He laughed
again. "At least we got plenty of graves to choose from."
"We've got time," said the Warden. "I've waited this long, I can wait another
few . . ." Her voice trailed off.
Stanley felt a lizard crawl in and out of his pocket.
"We're going to keep our story simple," said the Warden. "That woman's going to
ask a lot of questions. The A.G. will most likely initiate an investigation. So this is what
happened: Stanley tried to run away in the night, fell in a hole, and the lizards got him.
That's it. We're not even going to give them Zero's body. As far as anybody knows,
Zero doesn't exist. Like Mom said, we got plenty of graves to choose from."
"Why would he run away if he knew he was getting released today?" asked Mr.
Pendanski.
"Who knows? He's crazy. That was why we couldn't release him yesterday. He was
delirious, and we had to keep watch over him so he wouldn't hurt himself or anybody
else."
"She's not going to like it," said Mr. Pendanski.
"She's not going to like anything we tell her," said the Warden. She stared at Zero
and at the suitcase. "Why aren't you dead yet?" she asked.
Stanley only half listened to the talk of the counselors. He didn't know who "that
woman" was or what "A.G." meant. He didn't even realize they were initials. It sounded
like one word, "Age-ee." His mind was focused on the tiny claws that moved up and
down his skin and through his hair.
He tried to think about other things. He didn't want to die with the images of the
Warden, Mr. Sir, and the lizards etched into his brain. Instead, he tried to see his
mother's face.
His brain took him back to a time when he was very little, all bundled up in a
snowsuit. He and his mother were walking, hand in hand, mitten in mitten, when they
both slipped on some ice and fell and rolled down a snow-covered hillside. They ended
up at the bottom of the hill. He remembered he almost cried, but instead he laughed. His
mother laughed, too.
He could feel the same light-headed feeling he felt then, dizzy from rolling down
the hill. He felt the sharp coldness of the snow against his ear. He could see flecks of
snow on his mother's bright and cheery face.
This was where he wanted to be when he died.
"Hey, Caveman, guess what?" said Mr. Sir. "You're innocent, after all. I thought
you'd like to know that. Your lawyer came to get you yesterday. Too bad you weren't
here."
The words meant nothing to Stanley, who was still in the snow. He and his mother
climbed back up the hill and rolled down again, this time on purpose. Later they had hot
chocolate with lots of melted marshmallows.
"It's getting close to 4:30," said Mr. Pendanski. "They'll be waking up."
The Warden told the counselors to return to the tents. She told them to give the
campers breakfast and to make sure they didn't talk to anyone. As long as they did as

93
they were told, they wouldn't have to dig any more holes. If they talked, they would be
severely punished.
"How should we say they will be punished?" one of the counselors asked.
"Let them use their imaginations," said the Warden.
Stanley watched the counselors return to the tents, leaving only the Warden and Mr.
Sir behind. He knew the Warden didn't care whether the campers dug any more holes or
not. She'd found what she was looking for.
He glanced at Zero. A lizard was perched on his shoulder.
Zero remained perfectly still except for his right hand, which slowly formed into a
fist. Then he raised his thumb, giving Stanley the thumbs-up sign.
Stanley thought back to what Mr. Sir had said to him earlier, and the bits of
conversation he'd overheard. He tried to make sense out of it. Mr. Sir had said
something about a lawyer, but Stanley knew his parents couldn't afford a lawyer.
His legs were sore from remaining rigid for so long. Standing still was more
strenuous than walking. He slowly allowed himself to lean against the side of the hole.
The lizards didn't seem to mind.

47
The sun was up, and Stanley's heart was still beating. There were eight lizards in the
hole with him. Each one had exactly eleven yellow spots.
The Warden had dark circles under her eyes from Jack of sleep, and lines across her
forehead and face which seemed exaggerated in the stark morning light. Her skin
looked blotchy.
"Satan, "said Zero.
Stanley looked at him, unsure if Zero had even spoken or if he'd just imagined it.
"Why don't you go see if you can take the suitcase from Zero," the Warden
suggested.
"Yeah, right," said Mr. Sir.
"The lizards obviously aren't hungry," said the Warden.
"Then you go get the suitcase," said Mr. Sir.
They waited.
"Sa-tan lee," said Zero.
Sometime later Stanley saw a tarantula crawl across the dirt, not too far from his
hole. He had never seen a tarantula before, but there was no doubt what it was. He was
momentarily fascinated by it, as its big hairy body moved slowly and steadily along.
"Look, a tarantula," said Mr. Sir, also fascinated.
"I've never seen one," said the Warden. "Except in? "
Stanley suddenly felt a sharp sting on the side of his neck.
The lizard hadn't bitten him, however. It was merely pushing off.
It leapt off Stanley's neck and pounced on the tarantula. The last Stanley saw of it
was one hairy leg sticking out of the lizard's mouth.

94

"Not hungry, huh?" said Mr. Sir.
Stanley tried to return to the snow, but it was harder to get there when the sun was
up.
As the sun rose, the lizards moved lower in the hole, keeping mainly in the shade.
They were no longer on his head and shoulders but had moved down to his stomach,
legs, and feet.
He couldn't see any lizards on Zero, but believed there were two, between Zero's
knees, shaded from the sun by the suitcase.
"How are you doing?" Stanley asked quietly. He didn't whisper, but his voice was
dry and raspy.
"My legs are numb," said Zero.
"I'm going to try to climb out of the hole," Stanley said.
As he tried to pull himself up, using just his arms, he felt a claw dig into his ankle.
He gently eased himself back down.
"Is your last name your first name backward?" Zero asked.
Stanley stared at him in amazement. Had he been working on that all night?
He heard the sound of approaching cars.
Mr. Sir and the Warden heard it as well.
"You think it's them?" asked the Warden.
"It ain't Girl Scouts selling cookies," said Mr. Sir.
He heard the cars come to a stop, and the doors open and shut. A little while later he
saw Mr. Pendanski and two strangers, coming across the lake. One was a tall man in a
business suit and cowboy hat. The other was a short woman holding a briefcase. The
woman had to take three steps for every two taken by the man. "Stanley Yelnats?" she
called, moving out ahead of the others.
"I suggest you don't come any closer," said Mr. Sir.
"You can't stop me," she snapped, then took a second glance at him, wearing
pajama pants and nothing else. "We'll get you out of there, Stanley," she said. "Don't
you worry." She appeared to be Hispanic, with straight black hair and dark eyes. She
spoke with a little bit of a Mexican accent, trilling her r's.
"What in tarnation?" the tall man exclaimed, as he came up behind her.
She turned on him. "I'm telling you right now, if any harm comes to him, we will be
filing charges not only against Ms. Walker and Camp Green Lake but the entire state of
Texas as well. Child abuse. False imprisonment. Torture."
The man was more than a head taller than she, and was able to look directly over her
as he spoke to the Warden.
"How long have they been in there?"
"All night, as you can see by the way we're dressed. They snuck into my cabin while
I was asleep, and stole my suitcase. I chased after them, and they ran out here and fell
into the lizards' nest. I don't know what they were thinking."
"That's not true!" Stanley said.

95
"Stanley, as your attorney, I advise you not to say anything," said the woman, "until
you and I have had a chance to talk in private."
Stanley wondered why the Warden lied about the suitcase. He wondered who it
legally belonged to. That was one thing he wanted to ask his lawyer, if she really was
his lawyer.
"It's a miracle they're still alive," said the tall man.
"Yes, it is," the Warden agreed, with just a trace of disappointment in her voice.
"And they better come out of this alive," Stanley's lawyer warned. "This wouldn't
have happened if you'd released him to me yesterday."
"It wouldn't have happened if he wasn't a thief," said the Warden. "I told him he
would be set free today, and I guess he decided he'd try to take some of my valuables
with him. He's been delirious for the last week."
"Why didn't you release him when she came to you yesterday?" the tall man asked.
"She didn't have proper authorization," said the Warden.
"I had a court order!"
"It was not authenticated," the Warden said.
"Authenticated? It was signed by the judge who sentenced him."
"I needed authentication from the Attorney General," said the Warden. "How do I
know it's legitimate? The boys in my custody have proven themselves dangerous to
society. Am I supposed to just turn them loose any time someone hands me a piece of
paper?"
"Yes," said the woman. "If it's a court order."
"Stanley has been hospitalized for the last few days," the Warden explained. "He's
been suffering from hallucinations and delirium. Ranting and raving. He was in no
condition to leave. The fact that he was trying to steal from me on the day before his
release proves . . ."
Stanley tried to climb out of his hole, using mostly his arms so as not to disturb the
lizards too much. As he pulled himself upward, the lizards moved downward, keeping
out of the sun's direct rays. He swung his legs up and over, and the last of the lizards
hopped off.
"Thank God!" exclaimed the Warden. She started toward him, then stopped.
A lizard crawled out of his pocket and down his leg.
Stanley was overcome by a rush of dizziness and almost fell over. He steadied
himself, then reached down, took hold of Zero's arm, and helped him slowly to his feet.
Zero still held the suitcase.
The lizards, which had been hiding under it, scurried quickly into the hole.
Stanley and Zero staggered away.
The Warden rushed to them. She hugged Zero. "Thank God, you're alive," she said,
as she tried to take the suitcase from him.
He jerked it free. "It belongs to Stanley," he said.
"Don't cause any more trouble," the Warden warned. "You stole it from my cabin,
and you've been caught red-handed. If I press charges, Stanley might have to return to
prison. Now I'm willing, in view of all the circumstances, to? "
"It's got his name on it," said Zero.

96

Stanley's lawyer pushed past the tall man to have a look.
"See," Zero showed her. "Stanley Yelnats."
Stanley looked, too. There, in big black letters, was STANLEY YELNATS.
The tall man looked over the heads of the others at the name on the suitcase. "You
say he stole it from your cabin?"
The Warden stared at it in disbelief. "That's im . . . imposs . . . It's imposs . . ." She
couldn't even say it.

48
They slowly walked back to camp. The tall man was the Texas Attorney General,
the chief law enforcement officer for the state. Stanley's lawyer was named Ms.
Morengo.
Stanley held the suitcase. He was so tired he couldn't think straight. He felt as if he
was walking in a dream, not quite able to comprehend what was going on around him.
They stopped in front of the camp office. Mr. Sir went inside to get Stanley's
belongings. The Attorney General told Mr. Pendanski to get the boys something to
drink and eat.
The Warden seemed as dazed as Stanley. "You can't even read," she said to Zero.
Zero said nothing.
Ms. Morengo put a hand on Stanley's shoulder and told him to hang in there. He
would be seeing his parents soon.
She was shorter than Stanley, but somehow gave the appearance of being tall.
Mr. Pendanski returned with two cartons of orange juice and two bagels. Stanley
drank the juice but didn't feel like eating anything.
"Wait!" the Warden exclaimed. "I didn't say they stole the suitcase. It's his suitcase,
obviously, but he put my things from my cabin inside it."
"That isn't what you said earlier," said Ms. Morengo.
"What's in the suitcase?" the Warden asked Stanley. "Tell us what's in it, then we'll
open it and see!"
Stanley didn't know what to do.
"Stanley, as your lawyer, I advise you not to open your suitcase," said Ms.
Morengo.
"He has to open it!" said the Warden. "I have the right to check the personal
property of any of the detainees. How do I know there aren't drugs or weapons in there?
He stole a car, too! I've got witnesses!" She was nearly hysterical.
"He is no longer under your jurisdiction," said Stanley's lawyer.
"He has not been officially released," said the Warden. "Open the suitcase,
Stanley!"
"Do not open it," said Stanley's lawyer.
Stanley did nothing.
Mr. Sir returned from the office with Stanley's backpack and clothes.

97
The Attorney General handed Ms. Morengo a sheet of paper. "You're free to go," he
said to Stanley. "I know you're anxious to get out of here, so you can just keep the
orange suit as a souvenir. Or burn it, whatever you want. Good luck, Stanley."
He reached out his hand to shake, but Ms. Morengo hurried Stanley away. "C'mon,
Stanley," she said. "We have a lot to talk about."
Stanley stopped and turned to look at Zero. He couldn't just leave him here.
Zero gave him thumbs-up.
"I can't leave Hector," Stanley said.
"I suggest we go," said his lawyer with a sense of urgency in her voice.
"I'll be okay," said Zero. His eyes shifted toward Mr. Pendanski on one side of him,
then to the Warden and Mr. Sir on the other. '
"There's nothing I can do for your friend," said Ms. Morengo. "You are released
pursuant to an order from the judge."
"They'll kill him," said Stanley.
"Your friend is not in danger," said the Attorney General. "There's going to be an
investigation into everything that's happened here. For the present, I am taking charge
of the camp."
"C'mon, Stanley," said his lawyer. "Your parents are waiting."
Stanley stayed where he was.
His lawyer sighed. "May I have a look at Hector's file?" she asked.
"Certainly," said the Attorney General. "Ms. Walker, go get Hector's file."
She looked at him blankly.
"Well?"
The Warden turned to Mr. Pendanski. "Bring me Hector Zeroni's file."
He stared at her.
"Get it!" she ordered.
Mr. Pendanski went into the office. He returned a few minutes later and announced
the file was apparently misplaced.
The Attorney General was outraged. "What kind of camp are you running here, Ms.
Walker?"
The Warden said nothing. She stared at the suitcase.
The Attorney General assured Stanley's lawyer that he would get the records.
"Excuse me, while I call my office." He turned back to the Warden. "I assume the
phone works." He walked into the camp office, slamming the door behind him. A little
while later he reappeared and told the Warden he wanted to talk to her.
She cursed, then went inside.
Stanley gave Zero thumbs-up.
"Caveman? Is that you?"
He turned to see Armpit and Squid coming out of the Wreck Room. Squid shouted
back into the Wreck Room, "Caveman and Zero are out here!"
Soon all the boys from Group D had gathered around him and Zero.
"Good to see you, man," Armpit said, shaking his hand. "We thought you were
buzzard food."
"Stanley is being released today," said Mr. Pendanski.

98

"Way to go," said Magnet, hitting him on the shoulder.
"And you didn't even have to step on a rattlesnake," said Squid.
Even Zigzag shook Stanley's hand. "Sorry about . . . you know."
"It's cool," said Stanley.
"We had to lift the truck clear out of the hole," Zigzag told him. "It took everybody
in C, D, and E. We just picked it right up."
"It was really cool," said Twitch.
X-Ray was the only one who didn't come over. Stanley saw him hang back behind
the others a moment, then return to the Wreck Room.
"Guess what?" said Magnet, glancing at Mr. Pendanski. "Mom says we don't have
to dig any more holes."
"That's great," Stanley said.
"Will you do me a favor?" asked Squid.
"I guess," Stanley agreed, somewhat hesitantly.
"I want you to? " He turned to Ms. Morengo. "Hey, lady, you have a pen and paper
I can borrow?"
She gave it to him, and Squid wrote down a phone number which he gave to Stanley.
"Call my mom for me, okay? Tell her . . . Tell her I said I was sorry. Tell her Alan said
he was sorry."
Stanley promised he would.
"Now you be careful out in the real world," said Armpit. "Not everybody is as nice
as us."
Stanley smiled.
The boys departed when the Warden came out of the office. The Attorney General
was right behind her.
"My office is having some difficulty locating Hector Zeroni's records," the
Attorney General said.
"So you have no claim of authority over him?" asked Ms. Morengo.
"I didn't say that. He's in the computer. We just can't access his records. It's like
they've fallen through a hole in cyberspace."
"A hole in cyberspace," Ms. Morengo repeated. "How interesting. When is his
release date?"
"I don't know."
"How long has he been here?"
"Like I said, we can't? "
"So what are you planning to do with him? Keep him confined indefinitely, without
justification, while you go crawling through black holes in cyberspace?"
The Attorney General stared at her. "He was obviously incarcerated for a reason."
"Oh? And what reason was that?"
The Attorney General said nothing.
Stanley's lawyer took hold of Zero's hand. "C'mon, Hector, you're coming with us."

49

99
There never used to be yellow-spotted lizards in the town of Green Lake. They
didn't come to the area until after the lake dried up. But the townsfolk had heard about
the "red-eyed monsters" living in the desert hills.
One afternoon, Sam, the onion man, and his donkey, Mary Lou, were returning to
his boat, which was anchored just a little off shore. It was late in November and the
peach trees had lost most of their leaves.
"Sam!" someone called.
He turned around to see three men running after him, waving their hats. He waited.
"Afternoon, Walter. Bo, Jesse," he greeted them, as they walked up, catching their
breath,
"Glad we caught you," said Bo. "We're going rattlesnake hunting in the morning."
"We want to get some of your lizard juice," said Walter.
"I ain't a-scared of no rattlesnake," said Jesse. "But I don't want to come across one
of those red-eyed monsters. I seen one once, and that was enough. I knew about the red
eyes, of course. I hadn't heard about the big black teeth."
"It's the white tongues that get me," said Bo.
Sam gave each man two bottles of pure onion juice. He told them to drink one bottle
before going to bed that night, then a half bottle in the morning, and then a half bottle
around lunchtime.
"You sure this stuff works?" asked Walter.
"I tell you what," said Sam. "If it doesn't, you can come back next week and I'll give
you your money back."
Walter looked around unsure, as Bo and Jesse laughed. Then Sam laughed, too.
Even Mary Lou let out a rare hee-haw.
"Just remember," Sam told the men before they left. "It's very important you drink a
bottle tonight. You got to get it into your bloodstream. The lizards don't like onion
blood."
Stanley and Zero sat in the backseat of Ms. Morengo's BMW. The suitcase lay
between them. It was locked, and they decided they'd let Stanley's father try to open it
in his workshop.
"You don't know what's in it, do you?" she asked.
"No," said Stanley.
"I didn't think so."
The air-conditioning was on, but they drove with the windows open as well,
because, "No offense, but you boys really smell bad."
Ms. Morengo explained that she was a patent attorney. "I'm helping your father
with the new product he's invented. He happened to mention your situation, so I did a
little investigating. Clyde Livingston's sneakers were stolen sometime before 3:15. I
found a young man, Derrick Dunne, who said that at 3:20 you were in the bathroom
fishing your notebook out of the toilet. Two girls remembered seeing you come out of
the boys' restroom carrying a wet notebook."

100
Stanley felt his ears redden. Even after everything he'd been through, the memory
still caused him to feel shame.
"So you couldn't have stolen them," said Ms. Morengo.
"He didn't. I did," said Zero.
"You did what?" asked Ms. Morengo.
"I stole the sneakers."
The lawyer actually turned around while driving and looked at him. "I didn't hear
that," she said. "And I advise you to make sure I don't hear it again."
"What did my father invent?" Stanley asked. "Did he find a way to recycle
sneakers?"
"No, he's still working on that," explained Ms. Morengo. "But he invented a product
that eliminates foot odor. Here, I've got a sample in my briefcase. I wish I had more.
You two could bathe in it."
She opened her briefcase with one hand and passed a small bottle back to Stanley. It
had a fresh and somewhat spicy smell. He handed it to Zero.
"What's it called?" Stanley asked.
"We haven't come up with a name yet," said Ms. Morengo.
"It smells familiar," said Zero.
"Peaches, right?" asked Ms. Morengo. "That's what everyone says."
A short while later both boys fell asleep. Behind them the sky had turned dark, and
for the first time in over a hundred years, a drop of rain fell into the empty lake.

PART THREE
FILLING IN THE HOLES

50
Stanley's mother insists that there never was a curse. She even doubts whether
Stanley's great-great-grandfather really stole a pig. The reader might find it interesting,
however, that Stanley's father invented his cure for foot odor the day after the
great-great-grandson of Elya Yelnats carried the great-great-great-grandson of
Madame Zeroni up the mountain.
The Attorney General closed Camp Green Lake. Ms. Walker, w ho was in desperate
need of money, had to sell the land which had been in her family for generations. It was
bought by a national organization dedicated to the well-being of young girls. In a few
years, Camp Green Lake will become a Girl Scout camp.
This is pretty much the end of the story. The reader probably still has some
questions, but unfortunately, from here on in, the answers tend to be long and tedious.
While Mrs. Bell, Stanley's former math teacher, might want to know the percent change
in Stanley's weight, the reader probably cares more about the change in Stanley's

101
character and self-confidence. But those changes are subtle and hard to measure. There
is no simple answer.
Even the contents of the suitcase turned out to be somewhat tedious. Stanley's father
pried it open in his workshop, and at first everyone gasped at the sparkling jewels.
Stanley thought he and Hector had become millionaires. But the jewels were of poor
quality, worth no more than twenty thousand dollars.
Underneath the jewels was a stack of papers that had once belonged to the first
Stanley Yelnats. These consisted of stock certificates, deeds of trust, and promissory
notes. They were hard to read and even more difficult to understand. Ms. Morengo's
law firm spent more than two months going through all the papers.
They turned out to be a lot more valuable than the jewels. After legal fees and taxes,
Stanley and Zero each received less than a million dollars.
But not a lot less.
It was enough for Stanley to buy his family a new house, with a laboratory in the
basement, and for Hector to hire a team of private investigators.
But it would be boring to go through all the tedious details of all the changes in their
lives. Instead, the reader will be presented with one last scene, which took place almost
a year and a half after Stanley and Hector left Camp Green Lake.
You will have to fill in the holes yourself.
There was a small party at the Yelnats house. Except for Stanley and Hector,
everyone there was an adult. All kinds of snacks and drinks were set out on the counter,
including caviar, champagne, and the fixings to make ice cream sundaes.
The Super Bowl was on television, but nobody was really watching.
"It should be coming on at the next break," Ms. Morengo announced.
A time-out was called in the football game, and a commercial came on the screen.
Everyone stopped talking and watched.
The commercial showed a baseball game. Amid a cloud of dust, Clyde Livingston
slid into home plate as the catcher caught the ball and tried to tag him out.
"Safe!" shouted the umpire as he signaled with his arms.
The people at Stanley's house cheered, as if the run really counted.
Clyde Livingston got up and dusted the dirt off his uniform. As he made his way
back to the dugout, he spoke to the camera. "Hi, I'm Clyde Livingston, but everyone
around here calls me 'Sweet Feet.'"
"Way to go, Sweet Feet!" said another baseball player, slapping his hand.
Besides being on the television screen, Clyde Livingston was also sitting on the
couch next to Stanley.
"But my feet weren't always sweet," the television Clyde Livingston said as he sat
down on the dugout bench. "They used to smell so bad that nobody would sit near me in
the dugout."
"They really did stink," said the woman sitting on the couch on the other side of
Clyde. She held her nose with one hand, and fanned the air with the other.
Clyde shushed her.

102
"Then a teammate told me about Sploosh," said the television Clyde. He pulled a
can of Sploosh out from under the dugout bench and held it up for everyone to see. "I
just spray a little on each foot every morning, and now I really do have sweet feet. Plus,
I like the tingle."
"Sploosh," said a voice. "A treat for your feet. Made from all natural ingredients, it
neutralizes odor-causing fungi and bacteria. Plus, you'll like the tingle."
Everyone at the party clapped their hands.
"He wasn't lying," said the woman who sat next to Clyde. "I couldn't even be in the
same room with his socks."
The other people at the party laughed.
The woman continued. "I'm not joking. It was so bad? "
"You've made your point," said Clyde, covering her mouth with his hand. He
looked back at Stanley. "Will you do me a favor, Stanley?"
Stanley raised and lowered his left shoulder.
"I'm going to get more caviar," said Clyde. "Keep your hand over my wife's mouth."
He patted Stanley on the shoulder as he rose from the couch.
Stanley looked uncertainly at his hand, then at Clyde Livingston's wife.
She winked at him.
He felt himself blush, and turned away toward Hector, who was sitting on the floor
in front of an overstuffed chair.
A woman sitting in the chair behind Hector was absent-mindedly fluffing his hair
with her fingers. She wasn't very old, but her skin had a weathered look to it, almost like
leather. Her eyes seemed weary, as if she'd seen too many things in her life that she
didn't want to see. And when she smiled, her mouth seemed too big for her face.
Very softly, she half sang, half hummed a song that her grandmother used to sing to
her when she was a little girl.
If only, if only, the moon speaks no reply;
Reflecting the sun and all that's gone by.
Be strong my weary wolf, turn around boldly.
Fly high, my baby bird,
My angel, my only.